NGSS Preferred Integrated, Grade Six - Science (CA Dept of Education): [
    MS-LS1 From Molecules to Organisms: Structures and Processes:{
        Core Ideas: [
            LS1.A: Structure and Function
            - All living things are made up of cells. A cell is the
            smallest unit that can be said to be alive. An organism may consist of one single cell (unicellular) or
            many different numbers and types of cells (multicellular). (MS-LS1-1)
            - Within cells, special structures are responsible for
            particular functions, and the cell membrane forms
            the boundary that controls what enters and leaves
            the cell. (MS-LS1-2)
            - In multicellular organisms, the body is a system of
            multiple interacting subsystems. These subsystems
            are groups of cells that work together to form tissues
            and organs that are specialized for particular body
            functions. (MS-LS1-3)LS1.B: Growth and Development of Organisms
            - Animals engage in characteristic behaviors that
            increase the odds of reproduction. (MS-LS1-4)
            - Plants reproduce in a variety of ways, sometimes
            depending on animal behavior and specialized
            features for reproduction. (MS-LS1-4)
            - Genetic factors as well as local conditions affect
            the growth of the adult plant. (MS-LS1-5)
            LS1.D: Information Processing
            - Each sense receptor responds to different inputs
            (electromagnetic, mechanical, chemical), transmitting them as signals that travel along nerve cells
            to the brain. The signals are then processed in the
            brain, resulting in immediate behaviors or memories.
            (MS-LS1-8)
        ]
    }, 
    MS-LS3 Heredity: Inheritance and Variation of Traits: {
        Core Ideas: [
            LS1.B: Growth and Development of Organisms
            - Organisms reproduce, either sexually or asexually,
            and transfer their genetic information to their offspring. (secondary to MS-LS3-2)
            LS3.A: Inheritance of Traits
            - Variations of inherited traits between parent and offspring arise from genetic differences that result from
            the subset of chromosomes (and therefore genes)
            inherited. (MS-LS3-2)
            LS3.B: Variation of Traits
            - In sexually reproducing organisms, each parent
            contributes half of the genes acquired (at random)
            by the offspring. Individuals have two of each chromosome and hence two alleles of each gene, one
            acquired from each parent. These versions may be
            identical or may differ from each other. (MS-LS3-2)
        ]
    },
    MS-ESS2 Earth’s Systems: {
        Core Ideas: [
            ESS2.C: The Roles of Water in Earth’s Surface Processes
            - Water continually cycles among land, ocean, and
            atmosphere via transpiration, evaporation, condensation and crystallization, and precipitation, as well
            as downhill flows on land. (MS-ESS2-4)
            - The complex patterns of the changes and the
            movement of water in the atmosphere, determined
            by winds, landforms, and ocean temperatures and
            currents, are major determinants of local weather
            patterns. (MS-ESS2-5)
            - Global movements of water and its changes in form
            are propelled by sunlight and gravity. (MS-ESS2-4)
            - Variations in density due to variations in temperature and salinity drive a global pattern of interconnected ocean currents. (MS-ESS2-6)
            ESS2.D: Weather and Climate
            - Weather and climate are influenced by interactions
            involving sunlight, the ocean, the atmosphere, ice,
            landforms, and living things. These interactions
            vary with latitude, altitude, and local and regional
            geography, all of which can affect oceanic and atmospheric flow patterns. (MS-ESS2-6)
            - Because these patterns are so complex, weather
            can only be predicted probabilistically. (MS-ESS2-5)
            - The ocean exerts a major influence on weather and
            climate by absorbing energy from the sun, releasing
            it over time, and globally redistributing it through
            ocean currents. (MS-ESS2-6)
        ]
    },

    MS-ESS3 Earth and Human Activity: {
        Core Ideas: [
            ESS3.C: Human Impacts on Earth Systems
            - Human activities have significantly altered the biosphere, sometimes damaging or destroying natural
            habitats and causing the extinction of other species. But changes to Earth’s environments can have
            different impacts (negative and positive) for different
            living things. (MS-ESS3-3)
            ESS3.D: Global Climate Change
            - Human activities, such as the release of greenhouse gases from burning fossil fuels, are major
            factors in the current rise in Earth’s mean surface
            temperature (global warming). Reducing the level of
            climate change and reducing human vulnerability
            to whatever climate changes do occur depend on
            the understanding of climate science, engineering
            capabilities, and other kinds of knowledge, such as
            understanding of human behavior and on applying
            that knowledge wisely in decisions and activities.
            (MS-ESS3–5)
        ]
    }

    MS-PS3 Energy: {
        Core Ideas: [
            PS3.A: Definitions of Energy
            - Temperature is a measure of the average kinetic energy of particles of matter. The relationship
            between the temperature and the total energy of a
            system depends on the types, states, and amounts
            of matter present. (MS-PS3-3), (MS-PS3-4)
            PS3.B: Conservation of Energy and Energy Transfer
            - When the motion energy of an object changes, there
            is inevitably some other change in energy at the
            same time. (MS-PS3–5)
            - The amount of energy transfer needed to change the
            temperature of a matter sample by a given amount
            depends on the nature of the matter, the size of the
            sample, and the environment. (MS-PS3-4)
            Energy is spontaneously transferred out of hotter
            regions or objects and into colder ones. (MS-PS3-3)
            ETS1.A: Defining and Delimiting an Engineering
            Problem
            - The more precisely a design task’s criteria and constraints can be defined, the more likely it is that the
            designed solution will be successful. Specification
            of constraints includes consideration of scientific
            principles and other relevant knowledge that is likely
            to limit possible solutions. (secondary to MS-PS3-3)
            ETS1.B: Developing Possible Solutions
            - A solution needs to be tested, and then modified on
            the basis of the test results in order to improve it.
            There are systematic processes for evaluating solutions with respect to how well they meet criteria and
            constraints of a problem. (secondary to MS-PS3-3)
        ]
    },
]