Content from Bobby:[
Penguin Slides: `Few animals have evolved to survive the unforgiving Antarctic like penguins. Species like the emperor penguin have overlapping layers of
 insulating plumage, tightly packed veins to recycle body heat and just enough paunch to weather wind chills that approach minus 80 degrees Fahrenheit. 
 With all these cold-weather adaptations, it’s difficult to envision penguins living anywhere else. But fossils of ancient penguins have popped up along the 
 Equator, and many of these prehistoric seabirds predate the formation of Antarctica’s ice sheets. “They lived through some of the hottest times in Earth’s
  history, when it was five degrees warmer at the Equator,” said Daniel Ksepka, a paleontologist at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich, Conn. “They basically 
  evolved in an ice-free context.” To determine how penguins transitioned from balmy, tropical waters to polar seas, Dr. Ksepka and his colleagues recently
   analyzed the genomes of all living penguins, including pipsqueaks like the foot-tall blue penguin, rarities like the endangered yellow-eyed penguin and 
   showstoppers like the yellow-tufted rockhopper penguin. However, the genetics of modern penguins could tell the researchers only so much. Most modern 
   lineages date back only a couple million years, obscuring most of the 60-million-year odyssey of penguin evolution. Dr. Ksepka said that more than 
   three-quarters of all penguin species “are extinct now.” He added, “You have to look at the fossil record, or you’re only getting a fragment of the
    story.” ADVERTISEMENT SKIP ADVERTISEMENT To complement the modern data, the researchers examined fossils from a motley crew of ancient seafarers.
     Some prehistoric penguins plied tropical waters off Peru, using spearlike bills to harpoon fish. Others sported long legs, and the largest may have 
     pushed seven feet tall. Some even had patches of rusty red feathers. Comparing the genomes of modern penguins with fossil penguins allowed the team 
     to reconstruct penguin evolution. In their findings, published Tuesday in Nature Communications, the researchers pinpointed genes that helped penguins
      transition from wading through warm waters to perfecting the polar plunge. Some of these genes aided penguins’ ability to pack on blubber, while
       others molded their shriveled wings into streamlined flippers. Some even bolstered penguins’ immune systems or helped them tolerate low oxygen during
        deep dives. Image At the Natural History Museum in Lima, Peru, the paleontologist Rodolfo Salas examined the cranium of a giant fossil penguin,
         which lived 36 million years ago and was about five feet tall and weighed 130 pounds. At the Natural History Museum in Lima, Peru, the 
         paleontologist Rodolfo Salas examined the cranium of a giant fossil penguin, which lived 36 million years ago and was about five feet tall and 
         weighed 130 pounds.Credit...Mariana Bazo/Reuters The researchers also identified genes that helped fine-tune penguin eyes to peer through icy
          depths. Whereas most birds have four color cones in their eyes, one of these is inactive in penguins, hampering their ability to see green and 
          red. Instead, their eyes have adapted to adjust to the ambient blue of the ocean. Some missing genes were perplexing to the researchers. While 
          modern penguins gobble krill, the team found evidence that their ancestors lacked genes that would have helped break down crustacean shells. This
           may be evidence that ancient penguins were spearing larger prey, like fish and squid. Penguins retain a restricted palate. Their taste receptors
            can pick up only salty and sour tastes, which is “pretty good if you’re eating fish,” Dr. Ksepka said. “That’s probably why they’re pretty happy
             with sardines.” ADVERTISEMENT SKIP ADVERTISEMENT When these changes occurred in ancient penguins, they stuck. The genetic analyses revealed 
             that penguins generally have the lowest evolutionary rate of any group of birds. Because they look so bizarre, this glacial rate of change 
             seems surprising. But it reveals how successful the penguin’s plump yet streamlined body plan is — over millions of years, it has changed 
             only in slow increments. But emperor penguins, which breed during the bitter Antarctic winter, have the highest evolutionary rate of any 
             penguin, leading the researchers to deduce that colder temperatures somehow speed penguin evolution. Juliana Vianna, an ecologist at the
              Pontifical Catholic University of Chile, says this idea is consistent with the southward march of penguins occurring during bouts of 
              global cooling. “Their evolutionary history is pretty much associated with historical climate change and glaciation,” said Dr. Vianna, 
              who recently led similar research but was not involved in the new study. Understanding how penguins changed in the past may offer clues to 
              how these cold-weather specialists could fare in a hotter future. “Warming temperatures will impact the biogeographic ranges of penguins, the
               species they rely on as food and the species that, in turn, hunt them,” said Daniel Thomas, a paleontologist from Massey University in New
                Zealand and an author of the new study. While the research is a comprehensive look at the penguin family, Dr. Ksepka said, there’s still 
                one seabird missing — the last flying penguin. The small, puffinlike bird probably lived in ancient New Zealand, but its fossils have proved 
                elusive. “That would be the No. 1 thing I’d ask for if I had a genie,” he said.`

French Revolution Article: `Throughout the 18th century, France faced a mounting economic crisis. A rapidly growing population had outpaced the food supply.
 A severe winter in 1788 resulted in famine and widespread starvation in the countryside. Rising prices in Paris brought bread riots. By 1789 France was 
 broke. The nobility refused to pay more taxes, and the peasants simply couldn't. Even the opulent King Louis XVI, fonder of hunting and locksmithing than
  governing, recognized that a crisis loomed. He convened the Estates-General, made up of the Roman Catholic clergy (the First Estate) the nobility
   (the Second Estate), and everyone else (The Third Estate). The First and Second Estates owned most of the land and were lightly taxed; the Third owned
    little and was heavily taxed. Adams-French-1.jpg La Bastille, Courtesy: Library of Congress National Assembly On June 17, 1789, after Louis denied its 
    petition for a one man-one vote policy, the Third Estate seceded and formed the National Assembly. On July 11 Louis XVI ordered the army to disband it.
     On July 14 a mob stormed the Bastille prison in Paris looking for arms to protect itself from the king's forces. The capture of the Bastille ignited 
     one of the greatest social upheavals in Western history, the French Revolution. Violence spread to the countryside, where peasants demanded the 
     feudal system be dismantled. Fearing powerlessness, the nobility and landowners joined the National Assembly. On August 27, it issued the Declaration
      of the Rights of Man, guaranteeing all French citizens freedom of speech, press, and religion, as well as a representative government and 
      equality before the law. Some citizens, however, were more equal than others; women and slaves were excluded, and only property owners could hold 
      seats in the new legislature. Adams_french_03.jpg King Louis XVI, courtesy: Corbis Liberte, Egalite, Fraternite! The following summer, the National 
      Assembly created a new constitution. While King Louis XVI remained the nominal head of state, the National Assembly held all legislative power. On 
      June 20, 1791, Louis and his family, including his despised Austrian queen, Marie-Antoinette, attempted to flee France and were captured. The newly 
      created Legislative Assembly wanted to spread the revolution across Europe. In April 1792, France declared war on Austria. The war went badly, and 
      Louis XVI was blamed. Accused of treason, he was stripped of his title and imprisoned. In September 1792 a new National Convention declared France a 
      republic and abolished the monarchy. On January 21, 1793, Louis XVI was marched to the guillotine. His severed head was paraded for the gathered 
      thousands and met with cries of "Vive la Republique!" Adams_french_04.jpg Maximilien Robespierre, Courtesy: Library of Congress Madame Guillotine On
       September 5, 1793, Maximilien Robespierre began the Reign of Terror in response to the invasion of France by foreign troops. Thousands of so-called 
       counterrevolutionaries were slaughtered; estimates range from 14,000 to 40,000. France remained in Robespierre's bloody grip for 10 months until he 
       too was captured and beheaded. With the Reign of Terror over, France found some peace, but the country remained at war with Great Britain, the
        Netherlands, and Spain following Louis XVI's execution. Adams_french_05.jpg Napoleon, Courtesy: Corbis Emperor of the French In 1795, a new 
        constitution was adopted, with the Directory — five men elected from the National Assembly — acting as an executive branch and remaining in 
        power throughout much of John Adams presidency. Four years later, Napoleon Bonaparte and his army overthrew the Directory and signed the Convention 
        of 1800 with the United States, a commercial agreement that ended the so-called Quasi War. Napoleon would eventually declare himself "Emperor of the
         French." John Adams had feared just such a chaotic end: A revolution of this sort, he had argued, would lead not to democracy but despotism. France
          had abolished its monarchy only to find itself under the rule of an emperor. Years later Thomas Jefferson would admit that his own support for the
           French Revolution was misguided: "Your prophecies," he wrote to Adams, "... proved truer than mine. ... I did not, in '89, believe they would have
            lasted so long, nor have cost so much blood."`


]