ELA CCSS 5th Grade: {
    Reading - Literature: {
        Key Ideas and Details:
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.5.1
Quote accurately from a text when explaining what the text says explicitly and when drawing inferences from the text.
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.5.2
Determine a theme of a story, drama, or poem from details in the text, including how characters in a story or drama respond to challenges or how the speaker in a poem reflects upon a topic; summarize the text.
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.5.3
Compare and contrast two or more characters, settings, or events in a story or drama, drawing on specific details in the text (e.g., how characters interact).
Craft and Structure:
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.5.4
Determine the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in a text, including figurative language such as metaphors and similes.
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.5.5
Explain how a series of chapters, scenes, or stanzas fits together to provide the overall structure of a particular story, drama, or poem.
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.5.6
Describe how a narrator's or speaker's point of view influences how events are described.
Integration of Knowledge and Ideas:
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.5.7
Analyze how visual and multimedia elements contribute to the meaning, tone, or beauty of a text (e.g., graphic novel, multimedia presentation of fiction, folktale, myth, poem).
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.5.8
(RL.5.8 not applicable to literature)
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.5.9
Compare and contrast stories in the same genre (e.g., mysteries and adventure stories) on their approaches to similar themes and topics.
Range of Reading and Level of Text Complexity:
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.5.10
By the end of the year, read and comprehend literature, including stories, dramas, and poetry, at the high end of the grades 4-5 text complexity band independently and proficiently.
    },
    Reading - Foundational: {
        Phonics and Word Recognition:
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RF.5.3
    Know and apply grade-level phonics and word analysis skills in decoding words.
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RF.5.3.A
    Use combined knowledge of all letter-sound correspondences, syllabication patterns, and morphology (e.g., roots and affixes) to read accurately unfamiliar multisyllabic words in context and out of context.
    Fluency:
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RF.5.4
    Read with sufficient accuracy and fluency to support comprehension.
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RF.5.4.A
    Read grade-level text with purpose and understanding.
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RF.5.4.B
    Read grade-level prose and poetry orally with accuracy, appropriate rate, and expression on successive readings.
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RF.5.4.C
    Use context to confirm or self-correct word recognition and understanding, rereading as necessary.
    },
    Reading - Informational Text: {
        Key Ideas and Details:
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RI.5.1
    Quote accurately from a text when explaining what the text says explicitly and when drawing inferences from the text.
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RI.5.2
    Determine two or more main ideas of a text and explain how they are supported by key details; summarize the text.
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RI.5.3
    Explain the relationships or interactions between two or more individuals, events, ideas, or concepts in a historical, scientific, or technical text based on specific information in the text.
    Craft and Structure:
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RI.5.4
    Determine the meaning of general academic and domain-specific words and phrases in a text relevant to a grade 5 topic or subject area.
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RI.5.5
    Compare and contrast the overall structure (e.g., chronology, comparison, cause/effect, problem/solution) of events, ideas, concepts, or information in two or more texts.
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RI.5.6
    Analyze multiple accounts of the same event or topic, noting important similarities and differences in the point of view they represent.
    Integration of Knowledge and Ideas:
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RI.5.7
    Draw on information from multiple print or digital sources, demonstrating the ability to locate an answer to a question quickly or to solve a problem efficiently.
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RI.5.8
    Explain how an author uses reasons and evidence to support particular points in a text, identifying which reasons and evidence support which point(s).
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RI.5.9
    Integrate information from several texts on the same topic in order to write or speak about the subject knowledgeably.
    Range of Reading and Level of Text Complexity:
    CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RI.5.10
    By the end of the year, read and comprehend informational texts, including history/social studies, science, and technical texts, at the high end of the grades 4-5 text complexity band independently and proficiently.
    },
    Writing: {
                Text Types and Purposes:
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.1
        Write opinion pieces on topics or texts, supporting a point of view with reasons and information.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.1.A
        Introduce a topic or text clearly, state an opinion, and create an organizational structure in which ideas are logically grouped to support the writer's purpose.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.1.B
        Provide logically ordered reasons that are supported by facts and details.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.1.C
        Link opinion and reasons using words, phrases, and clauses (e.g., consequently, specifically).
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.1.D
        Provide a concluding statement or section related to the opinion presented.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.2
        Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas and information clearly.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.2.A
        Introduce a topic clearly, provide a general observation and focus, and group related information logically; include formatting (e.g., headings), illustrations, and multimedia when useful to aiding comprehension.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.2.B
        Develop the topic with facts, definitions, concrete details, quotations, or other information and examples related to the topic.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.2.C
        Link ideas within and across categories of information using words, phrases, and clauses (e.g., in contrast, especially).
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.2.D
        Use precise language and domain-specific vocabulary to inform about or explain the topic.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.2.E
        Provide a concluding statement or section related to the information or explanation presented.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.3
        Write narratives to develop real or imagined experiences or events using effective technique, descriptive details, and clear event sequences.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.3.A
        Orient the reader by establishing a situation and introducing a narrator and/or characters; organize an event sequence that unfolds naturally.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.3.B
        Use narrative techniques, such as dialogue, description, and pacing, to develop experiences and events or show the responses of characters to situations.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.3.C
        Use a variety of transitional words, phrases, and clauses to manage the sequence of events.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.3.D
        Use concrete words and phrases and sensory details to convey experiences and events precisely.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.3.E
        Provide a conclusion that follows from the narrated experiences or events.
        Production and Distribution of Writing:
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.4
        Produce clear and coherent writing in which the development and organization are appropriate to task, purpose, and audience. (Grade-specific expectations for writing types are defined in standards 1-3 above.)
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.5
        With guidance and support from peers and adults, develop and strengthen writing as needed by planning, revising, editing, rewriting, or trying a new approach. (Editing for conventions should demonstrate command of Language standards 1-3 up to and including grade 5 here.)
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.6
        With some guidance and support from adults, use technology, including the Internet, to produce and publish writing as well as to interact and collaborate with others; demonstrate sufficient command of keyboarding skills to type a minimum of two pages in a single sitting.
        Research to Build and Present Knowledge:
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.7
        Conduct short research projects that use several sources to build knowledge through investigation of different aspects of a topic.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.8
        Recall relevant information from experiences or gather relevant information from print and digital sources; summarize or paraphrase information in notes and finished work, and provide a list of sources.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.9
        Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research.
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.9.A
        Apply grade 5 Reading standards to literature (e.g., "Compare and contrast two or more characters, settings, or events in a story or a drama, drawing on specific details in the text [e.g., how characters interact]").
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.9.B
        Apply grade 5 Reading standards to informational texts (e.g., "Explain how an author uses reasons and evidence to support particular points in a text, identifying which reasons and evidence support which point[s]"").
        Range of Writing:
        CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.10
        Write routinely over extended time frames (time for research, reflection, and revision) and shorter time frames (a single sitting or a day or two) for a range of discipline-specific tasks, purposes, and audiences.
    },



}