CA NGSS Discipline Specific Grade 8 - Science (CA Dept of Education): [
    MS-PS1 Matter and Its Interactions: {
        Core Ideas: [
            PS1.A: Structure and Properties of Matter
            - Substances are made from different types of atoms,
            which combine with one another in various ways.
            Atoms form molecules that range in size from two to
            thousands of atoms. (MS-PS1-1)
            - Each pure substance has characteristic physical and
            chemical properties (for any bulk quantity under
            given conditions) that can be used to identify it.
            (MS-PS1-2), (MS-PS1-3)
            ***Supplemental DCI ESS3.C, LS4.D
            - Gases and liquids are made of molecules or inert
            atoms that are moving about relative to each other.
            (MS-PS1-4)
            - In a liquid, the molecules are constantly in contact
            with others; in a gas, they are widely spaced except
            when they happen to collide. In a solid, atoms are
            closely spaced and may vibrate in position but do
            not change relative locations. (MS-PS1-4)
            - Solids may be formed from molecules, or they may
            be extended structures with repeating subunits (e.g.,
            crystals). (MS-PS1-1)
            - The changes of state that occur with variations in
            temperature or pressure can be described and predicted using these models of matter. (MS-PS1-4)
            PS1.B: Chemical Reactions
            - Substances react chemically in characteristic ways.
            In a chemical process, the atoms that make up the
            original substances are regrouped into different
            molecules, and these new substances have different
            properties from those of the reactants. (MS-PS1-2),
            (MS-PS1-3)
            ***Supplemental DCI ESS3.C, LS4.D (MS-PS1-5)
            - The total number of each type of atom is conserved,
            and thus the mass does not change. (MS-PS1-5)
            - Some chemical reactions release energy, others
            store energy. (MS-PS1-6)
            PS3.A: Definitions of Energy
            - The term “heat” as used in everyday language refers
            both to thermal energy (the motion of atoms or
            molecules within a substance) and the transfer of
            that thermal energy from one object to another. In
            science, heat is used only for this second meaning;
            it refers to the energy transferred due to the temperature difference between two objects. (secondary
            to MS-PS1-4)
            - The temperature of a system is proportional to the
            average internal kinetic energy and potential energy
            per atom or molecule (whichever is the appropriate
            building block for the system’s material). The details
            of that relationship depend on the type of atom or
            molecule and the interactions among the atoms in
            the material. Temperature is not a direct measure of
            a system’s total thermal energy. The total thermal
            energy (sometimes called the total internal energy)
            of a system depends jointly on the temperature, the
            total number of atoms in the system, and the state
            of the material. (secondary to MS-PS1-4)
            ETS1.B: Developing Possible Solutions
            - A solution needs to be tested, and then modified on
            the basis of the test results, in order to improve it.
            (secondary to MS-PS1-6)
            ETS1.C: Optimizing the Design Solution
            - Although one design may not perform the best
            across all tests, identifying the characteristics of
            the design that performed the best in each test can
            provide useful information for the redesign process—
            that is, some of the characteristics may be incorporated into the new design. (secondary to MS-PS1-6)
            - The iterative process of testing the most promising
            solutions and modifying what is proposed on the
            basis of the test results leads to greater refinement
            and ultimately to an optimal solution. (secondary to
            MS-PS1-6)
        ]
    },

    MS-PS2 Motion and Stability: Forces and Interactions: {
        Core Ideas: [
            PS2.A: Forces and Motion
            - For any pair of interacting objects, the force exerted
            by the first object on the second object is equal in
            strength to the force that the second object exerts
            on the first, but in the opposite direction (Newton’s
            Third Law). (MS-PS2-1)
            - The motion of an object is determined by the sum
            of the forces acting on it; if the total force on the
            object is not zero, its motion will change. The greater
            the mass of the object, the greater the force needed
            to achieve the same change in motion. For any given
            object, a larger force causes a larger change in
            motion. (MS-PS2-2)
            - All positions of objects and the directions of forces
            and motions must be described in an arbitrarily chosen reference frame and arbitrarily chosen units of
            size. In order to share information with other people,
            these choices must also be shared. (MS-PS2-2)
            PS2.B: Types of Interactions
            - Electric and magnetic (electromagnetic) forces can
            be attractive or repulsive, and their sizes depend on
            the magnitudes of the charges, currents, or magnetic strengths involved and on the distances between
            the interacting objects. (MS-PS2-3)
            - Gravitational forces are always attractive. There is a
            gravitational force between any two masses, but it is
            very small except when one or both of the objects
            have large mass—e.g., Earth and the sun. (MSPS2-4)
            ***Supplemental ESS1.A, ESS1.B
            - Forces that act at a distance (electric, magnetic,
            and gravitational) can be explained by fields that
            extend through space and can be mapped by their
            effect on a test object (a charged object, or a ball,
            respectively). (MS-PS2-5)
        ]
    },
    MS-PS3 Energy: {
        Core Ideas: [
            PS3.A: Definitions of Energy
            - Motion energy is properly called kinetic energy; it is
            proportional to the mass of the moving object and
            grows with the square of its speed. (MS-PS3-1)
            - A system of objects may also contain stored (potential) energy, depending on their relative positions.
            (MS-PS3-2)
            PS3.C: Relationship Between Energy and Forces
            - When two objects interact, each one exerts a force
            on the other that can cause energy to be transferred
            to or from the object. (MS-PS3-2)
            PS3.A: Definitions of Energy
            - Temperature is a measure of the average kinetic energy of particles of matter. The relationship
            between the temperature and the total energy of a
            system depends on the types, states, and amounts
            of matter present. (MS-PS3-3), (MS-PS3-4)
            PS3.B: Conservation of Energy and Energy Transfer
            - When the motion energy of an object changes, there
            is inevitably some other change in energy at the
            same time. (MS-PS3–5)
            - The amount of energy transfer needed to change the
            temperature of a matter sample by a given amount
            depends on the nature of the matter, the size of the
            sample, and the environment. (MS-PS3-4)
            - Energy is spontaneously transferred out of hotter
            regions or objects and into colder ones. (MS-PS3-3)
            ETS1.A: Defining and Delimiting an Engineering
            Problem
            - The more precisely a design task’s criteria and constraints can be defined, the more likely it is that the
            designed solution will be successful. Specification
            of constraints includes consideration of scientific
            principles and other relevant knowledge that is likely
            to limit possible solutions. (secondary to MS-PS3-3)
            ETS1.B: Developing Possible Solutions
            - A solution needs to be tested, and then modified on
            the basis of the test results in order to improve it.
            There are systematic processes for evaluating solutions with respect to how well they meet criteria and
            constraints of a problem. (secondary to MS-PS3-3)
        ]
    },
    MS-PS4 Waves and Their Applications in Technologies for Information Transfer:{
        Core Ideas: [
            PS4.A: Wave Properties
            - A simple wave has a repeating pattern with a
            specific wavelength, frequency, and amplitude. (MSPS4-1)
            - A sound wave needs a medium through which it is
            transmitted. (MS-PS4-2)
            PS4.B: Electromagnetic Radiation
            - When light shines on an object, it is reflected,
            absorbed, or transmitted through the object, depending on the object’s material and the frequency
            (color) of the light. (MS-PS4-2)
            - The path that light travels can be traced as straight
            lines, except at surfaces between different transparent materials (e.g., air and water, air and glass)
            where the light path bends. (MS-PS4-2)
            - A wave model of light is useful for explaining brightness, color, and the frequency-dependent bending
            of light at a surface between media. (MS-PS4-2)
            - However, because light can travel through space, it
            cannot be a matter wave, like sound or water waves.
            (MS-PS4-2)
            PS4.C: Information Technologies and Instrumentation
            - Digitized signals (sent as wave pulses) are a more
            reliable way to encode and transmit information.
            (MS-PS4-3)
        ]
    }
]
