Oklahoma Academic Standards for Science 7th Grade: [
    Matter and Its Interactions (PS1): {
        Core Ideas: [
            • Substances are made from different types of atoms, which combine
            with one another in various ways.
            • Atoms form molecules that range in size from two to thousands of
            atoms.
            • Solids may be formed from molecules, or they may be extended
            structures with repeating subunits (e.g., crystals).
            • Each pure substance has characteristic physical and chemical
            properties (for any bulk quantity under given conditions) that can
            be used to identify it.
            • Substances react chemically in characteristic ways. In a chemical
            process, the atoms that make up the original substances are
            regrouped into different molecules, and these new substances have
            different properties from those of the reactants.
            • Each pure substance has characteristics, physical and chemical
            properties (for any bulk quantity under given conditions), that can be
            used to identify it.
            • Substances react chemically in characteristic ways.
            • In a chemical process, the atoms that make up the original
            substances regroup into different molecules, and these new
            substances have different properties from those of the reactants.
            • Engineering advances have led to important discoveries in virtually
            every field of science, and scientific discoveries have led to the
            development of entire industries and engineered systems.
            • The uses of technologies and any limitations on their use are driven
            by individual or societal needs, desires, and values; by the findings of
            scientific research; and by differences in such factors as climate,
            natural resources, and economic conditions. 
            • Substances react chemically in characteristic ways.
            • In a chemical process, the atoms that make up the original
            substances are regrouped into different molecules, and these new
            substances have different properties from those of the reactants.
            • The total number of each type of atom is conserved and thus, the
            mass does not change.
            Laws are regularities or mathematical descriptions of natural
            phenomena.
            • Some chemical reactions release energy, others store energy.
            • A solution needs to be tested, and then modified on the basis of the
            test results, in order to improve it.
            • The iterative process of testing the most promising solutions and
            modifying what is proposed on the basis of the test results leads to
            greater refinement and ultimately to an optimal solution.
        ]
    }
    Energy (PS3): {
        Core Ideas: [
            • A system of objects may also contain stored (potential) energy,
            depending on their relative positions.
            • When two objects interact, each one exerts a force on the other that
            can cause energy to be transferred to or from the object.
            • When the motion energy of an object changes, there is inevitably
            some other change in energy at the same time.
        ]
    }
    From Molecules to Organisms: Structure and Function (LS1): {
        Core Ideas: [
            • Plants, algae (including phytoplankton), and many microorganisms
            use the energy from light to make sugars (food) from carbon dioxide
            from the atmosphere and water through the process of
            photosynthesis, which also releases oxygen. These sugars can be
            used immediately or stored for growth or later use.
            • The chemical reaction by which plants produce complex food
            molecules (sugars) requires an energy input (i.e., from sunlight) to
            occur.
            • In this reaction, carbon dioxide and water combine to form carbonbased organic molecules and release oxygen. 
            Within an individual organism, food moves through a series of
            chemical reactions in which it is broken down and rearranged to
            form new molecules, to support growth, or release energy.
            • Cellular respiration in plants and animals involves chemical reactions
            with oxygen that release stored energy. In these processes, complex
            molecules containing carbon react with oxygen to produce carbon
            dioxide and other materials. 
        ]
    }
    Ecosystems: Interactions, Energy, and Dynamics (LS2): {
        Core Ideas: [
           • Organisms, and populations of organisms, are dependent on their
            environmental interactions both with other living things and with
            nonliving factors.
            • In any ecosystem, organisms and populations with similar requirements
            for food, water, oxygen, or other resources may compete with each
            other for limited resources, access to which consequently constrains
            their growth and reproduction.
            • Growth of organisms and population increases are limited by access to
            resources. 
            • Predatory interactions may reduce the number of organisms or eliminate
            whole populations of organisms. Mutually beneficial interactions, in
            contrast, may become so interdependent that each organism requires
            the other for survival. Although the species involved in these
            competitive, predatory, and mutually beneficial interactions vary across
            ecosystems, the patterns of interactions of organisms with their
            environments, both living and nonliving, are shared. 
            Food webs are models that demonstrate how matter and energy is
            transferred between producers, consumers, and decomposers as
            the three groups interact within an ecosystem.
            • Transfers of matter into and out of the physical environment occur at
            every level.
            • Decomposers recycle nutrients from dead plant or animal matter
            back to the soil in terrestrial environments or to the water in aquatic
            environments.
            • The atoms that make up the organisms in an ecosystem are cycled
            repeatedly between the living and nonliving parts of the ecosystem. 
            • Ecosystems are dynamic in nature; their characteristics can vary over
            time.
            • Disruptions to any physical or biological component of an
            ecosystem can lead to shifts in all its populations.
            • Biodiversity describes the variety of species found in Earth’s
            terrestrial and oceanic ecosystems.
            • The completeness or integrity of an ecosystem’s biodiversity is
            often used as a measure of its health.
            • Changes in biodiversity can influence humans’ resources, such as
            food, energy, and medicines, as well as ecosystem services that
            humans rely on—for example, water purification and recycling.
            • There are systematic processes for evaluating solutions with respect
            to how well they meet the criteria and constraints of a problem.
        ]
    }
    Earth and Human Activity (ESS3): {
        Core Ideas: [
            • Humans depend on Earth’s land, ocean, atmosphere, and
            biosphere for many different resources.
            • Minerals, fresh water, and biosphere resources are limited, and
            many are not renewable or replaceable over human lifetimes.
            • These resources are distributed unevenly around the planet as a
            result of past geologic processes.
            • Human activities have significantly altered the biosphere, sometimes
            damaging or destroying natural habitats and causing the extinction of
            other species. But changes to Earth’s environments can have different
            impacts (negative and positive) for different living things.
            • Typically, as human populations and per-capita consumption of natural
            resources increase, so do the negative impacts on Earth unless the
            activities and technologies involved are engineered otherwise. 
            • Typically, as human populations and per-captia consumption of natural
            resources increase, so do the negative impacts on Earth unless the
            activities and technologies involved are engineered otherwise.
            • Understanding atmospheric changes and reducing human
            vulnerability to whatever climate changes do occur depend on the
            understanding of climate science, engineering capabilities, and
            other kinds of knowledge (such as understanding of human
            behavior) and on applying that knowledge wisely in decisions and
            activities. 
        ]
    }
]