Catholic Church DBQ: [

Evaluate whether or not the Catholic Church in the 1600s was opposed to new ideas in science.”
Points Rubric Notes A: Thesis/Claim (0-1)
Responds to the prompt with a
historically defensible thesis/claim that
establishes a line of reasoning. (1 point)
To earn this point, the thesis must make
a claim that responds to the prompt
rather than restating or rephrasing the
prompt. The thesis must consist of one or
more sentences located in one place,
either in the introduction or the
conclusion.
The thesis must take a position on whether the Catholic
Church in the 1600s was opposed to new ideas in
science, with some indication of the reason for taking
that position.
• “The Catholic Church was opposed to new ideas as
it put the Bible under heavy criticizing, caused
people and clergy to question teachings, and
provided evidence that the sun was the center of
the universe and not the Earth.”
• “The Catholic Church in the 1600s was not opposed
to new ideas in science due to the willingness of
the Catholic Church to listen and learn while also
having the desire to conduct science themselves.”
• “The Catholic Church opposed new scientific ideas
because they threatened the Church’s
interpretation of scripture.”
B: Contextualization (0-1)
Describes a broader historical context
relevant to the prompt. (1 point)
To earn this point, the response must
relate the topic of the prompt to broader
historical events, developments, or
processes that occur before, during, or
continue after the time frame of the
question. This point is not awarded for
merely a phrase or reference.
To earn the point, the essay must accurately describe a
broader context relevant to the Catholic Church in the
early modern period and/or new ideas in science.
Examples might discuss the following topics, with
appropriate elaboration:
• The Protestant Reformation
• The Catholic Reformation
• Scientific Revolution
• Geocentricism
• The development and spread of the Gutenberg
printing press

Question 1 — Document-Based Question (continued)
C: Evidence (0-3)
Evidence from the Documents:
Uses the content of at least three
documents to address the topic of the
prompt. (1 point)
OR
Supports an argument in response to
the prompt using at least six
documents. (2 points)
To earn 1 point, the response must accurately describe —
rather than simply quote — the content from at least three
of the documents to address the topic of the Catholic
Church’s stance on new scientific ideas.
To earn 2 points, the response must accurately describe
— rather than simply quote — the content from at least
six documents. In addition, the response must use the
content from the documents to support an argument in
response to the prompt.
Evidence from the documents may include such
examples as:
• Cardinal Bellarmine upholding the geocentric view
of the world
• Galileo’s claims that geocentrism is a result of not
understanding the Bible
• Jesuit astronomers, such as Schreiner, observing
sunspots
Evidence beyond the Documents:
Uses at least one additional piece of
specific historical evidence (beyond that
found in the documents) relevant to an
argument about the prompt. (1 point)
To earn this point, the evidence must be
described, and it must be more than a
phrase or reference. This additional piece
of evidence must be different from the
evidence used to earn the point for
contextualization.
Typically, statements credited as evidence from outside
the documents will be more specific details relevant to
an argument, analogous to the function of evidence
drawn from the documents.
Typically, statements credited as contextualization will
be more general statements that place an argument, or
a significant portion of it, in a broader context.

Question 1 — Document-Based Question (continued)
D: Analysis and Reasoning (0-2)
Sourcing: For at least three documents,
explains how or why the document’s
point of view, purpose, historical
situation, and/or audience is relevant to
an argument. (1 point)
See document summaries for examples
of possible sourcing.
To earn this point, the response must explain how or why
— rather than simply identifying — the document’s point
of view, purpose, historical situation, or audience is
relevant to an argument that addresses the prompt for
each of the three documents sourced.
Complexity: Demonstrates a complex
understanding of the historical
development that is the focus of
prompt, using evidence to corroborate,
qualify, or modify an argument that
addresses the question. (1 point)
This understanding must be part of an
argument, not merely a phrase or
reference.
Complexity should emerge from the essay’s
argumentation and use of evidence, and while it does not
have to be present throughout the essay, the complexity
point should consist of substantial elaboration.
Examples of demonstrating a complex understanding
for this question might include:
• Explaining nuance of motivation by analyzing how
different elements of the Church had different
goals and motivations in dealing with the
implications of the Scientific Revolution
• Explaining how the Church both opposed and
supported scientific investigation as Church
authorities attempted to maintain control over
religion, knowledge, and education
• Explaining relevant and insightful connections
within and across periods, such as comparing the
actions of the Church during the Scientific
Revolution of the 1600s with the actions of the
Church during the Protestant Reformation of the
1500s, or explaining shifts within the Catholic
clergy’s willingness to consider scientific ideas
over the period identified by the prompt
• Confirming the validity of an argument by
corroborating multiple perspectives across the
documents and using outside evidence
• Qualifying or modifying an argument by
considering diverse or alternative views or
evidence, such as pointing out the political
interests that influenced the Church’s stance on the
Scientific Revolution
If response is completely blank, enter - - for all four score categories A, B, C, and D.

Question 1 — Document-Based Question (continued)
Document Summaries and Possible Sourcing
Document Summary of Content Explains the relevance of point of view,
purpose, situation, and/or audience by
elaborating on examples such as:
1. Paolo
Foscarini
• Advocates for Copernicus’s
model of planetary movements
in a heliocentric system
• Notes that many are questioning the
Ptolemaic model based on new
observations (situation)
• Discusses the fear many scholars have of
contradicting the Bible in endorsing the
Copernican model (POV/audience)
2. Cardinal
Bellarmine
• Replies to Foscarini and affirms
the Catholic belief in the
geocentric model in order to
uphold the authority of the
Church
• Cites the Council of Trent in order to
remind Foscarini of the danger of
contradicting scripture
(purpose/audience)
• Is acting as an agent of the Catholic
Reformation by citing the Council of
Trent (situation)
3. Christoph
Greinberger
• Advocates for Jesuits to be
allowed to think more freely
about descriptions of the
universe
• Is countering the idea that scientific
observations are against scripture
(purpose/audience)
• As a German Jesuit mathematician, he
wants more freedom to investigate new
ideas (POV)
4. Galileo
Galilei
• Claims that contradictions
between the Bible and
heliocentrism are attributable to
the “abstruse” language of the
Bible
• Is acting in his own self-interest as an
astronomer who believes in the
heliocentric model and is persecuted as a
result (POV)
• Galileo seeks the support of political
authorities as sponsors of science and to
counterbalance the Church
(audience/purpose)
5. Maria
Celeste
Galilei
• Claims that the Pope supports
Galileo based on letters sent to
Galileo
• To reassure his daughter, Galileo may
have been exaggerating his support from
the Pope (purpose)
• As a radical nun, Suor Arcangela is more
likely to tolerate dissenting views such as
those of Maria and Galileo (situation)
6. Sunspots
image
• Shows Christoph Scheiner, a
German Jesuit astronomer,
observing sunspots
• Shows Jesuit astronomical research to a
broader educated public (audience)
• Places the Jesuit researchers in the best
possible light as scholars and men of faith
(POV)
7. Critique of
Descartes
• French Jesuit school rejects
Descartes’s ideas as heretical
• Standing for traditional order against
Descartes’s more direct challenge to
scriptural authority (purpose)
• Sees Descartes’s model as undermining
Church authority (POV)

Introductory notes:
• Except where otherwise noted, each point of these rubrics is earned independently, e.g., a student
could earn a point for evidence without earning a point for thesis/claim.
• Accuracy: The components of this rubric require that students demonstrate historically defensible
content knowledge. Given the timed nature of the exam, the essay may contain errors that do not
detract from the overall quality, as long as the historical content used to advance the argument is
accurate.
• Clarity: Exam essays should be considered first drafts and thus may contain grammatical errors.
Those errors will not be counted against a student unless they obscure the successful demonstration of
the content knowledge, skills, and practices described below.
Note: Student samples (when available) are quoted verbatim and may contain grammatical errors.
A. Thesis/Claim (0-1 point)
The thesis must take a position on whether the Catholic Church was opposed to new ideas in science, with
some indication of the reason for taking that position.
Responses earn 1 point by responding to the prompt with a historically defensible thesis that establishes a line
of reasoning about the topic. To earn this point, the thesis must make a claim that responds to the prompt
rather than simply restating or rephrasing the prompt. The thesis must suggest at least one main line of
argument development or establish the analytic categories of the argument.
The thesis must consist of one or more sentences located in one place, either in the introduction or the
conclusion, which is not necessarily limited to the first or last paragraph.
Examples of acceptable theses:
• “Thus, the Catholic Church in the 1600s was split between those who believed in science and wanted
to reconcile it with Catholic tradition and those who oppose it because it undermined Catholic
doctrine.” (The response addresses the prompt with an evaluative claim that establishes a line of
reasoning.)
• “Although there were individual members of the clergy who were willing to accept new ideas in
science, the Church as an institution was generally opposed to these ideas because they contrasted
traditional interpretation of scripture, traditional scientific thought, and common ideas in philosophy.”
(The response addresses the prompt with a robust evaluative claim that establishes a line of reasoning.)
• “However, in the 1600s, the Catholic Church strongly opposed new developments in Science as they
considered these developments to be against the Bible.” (The response addresses the prompt with a
claim that establishes a minimally acceptable line of reasoning.)

Question 1 — Document-Based Question (continued)
Example of unacceptable theses:
• “Although it is a commonly-held belief today that the Catholic Church is anti-science and doesn’t
accept new ideas in history, this is a miscategorization of the Church’s beliefs at times.” (The response
acknowledges the terms of the question, but the line of reasoning is nonspecific and essentially repeats the
terms of the prompt. If this statement was immediately followed or preceded by another sentence
suggesting a valid reason for taking this position, then the two sentences taken together could receive
credit.)
• “People during the 16th-17th centuries began to realize that there was another view of the universe that
made more sense to our world but went against the Catholic Church. This reveals that the Catholic
Church opposed new ideas in science during the 1600s.” (The response merely indicates the position
that will be argued without giving any indication as to the line of reasoning. If this statement was
immediately followed or preceded by another sentence suggesting a valid reason for taking this position,
then the two sentences taken together could receive credit.)
• “The Catholic Church in the 1600’s were opposed and not opposed to the new ideas being introduced
in the 1600’s.” (The response addresses the prompt by merely rephrasing it.)
B. Contextualization (0-1 point)
Responses earn 1 point for contextualization by describing a broader historical context relevant to the prompt.
To earn this point, the response must accurately and explicitly connect the context of the prompt to broader
historical events, developments, or processes that occur before, during, or continue after the time frame of the
question. This point is not awarded for merely a phrase or reference.
To earn the point, the essay must accurately describe a broader context relevant to the Catholic Church in the
early modern period and/or new ideas in science.
Examples of acceptable contextualization:
• “The 1600’s in Europe was a time of intellectual change. The rediscovery of classical texts during the
Renaissance also reintroduced Greco-Roman scientific thought from the likes of Aristotle and Ptolemy
along with reasoning and logic. However, with more advanced technological innovations, such as the
telescope and microscope, closer observation of the natural world has lead leading scientists such as
Tycho Brahe, Copernicus, and Galileo to question the traditional Ptolemaic beliefs, the scientific
viewpoint of the Catholic Church.” (The response relates scientific development over time to challenge the
position of the Catholic Church.)
• “The Scientific Revolution began in the Seventeenth century. It consisted of using reasoning and
observation to know the truth (René Descartes and Francis Bacon). As a result, scientists such as
Nicholas Copernicus observed to find new truths. Scientists believed that the truth can never be given
and can only be learnt by doubting and use of logic. Copernicus developed the heliocentric theory.
This theory stated that the sun, not the earth, was the center of the Solar System. This contradicted
from the geocentric view of the earth being the center while the sun, moon and planets orbited it. The
geocentric view was accepted for centuries and was taught by the Catholic Church.” (The response
recognizes the development of new scientific evidence and relates it to the traditional beliefs of the Catholic
Church.)
Question 1 — Document-Based Question (continued)
Examples of unacceptable contextualization:
• “Prior to common knowledge, it was believed that the universe revolved around the Earth as stated in
the Holy Scriptures. The Catholic Church promoted this idea for many years, however it is known that
those who opposed the Church are punished.” (The response attempts to lay the foundation for the
Church’s geocentric stance but does so vaguely without providing sufficient information.)
• “The Enlightenment was happening during this time period, through it emerged many new ideas in
both philosophy and science. A more rational and secular way of thinking was becoming popular.
Many Enlightenment ideas contradicted those of the Church. However, members of the Catholic
Church had a hard time denying clear evidence and over time began to view it as a possibility.” (The
response relating the Enlightenment to the Scientific Revolution is incorrect.)
Students may choose to discuss such potentially relevant examples of context as:
• The Catholic Reformation and the Council of Trent
• The educational mission of the Jesuit order
• The spread of the printing press and scientific ideas
• The wars of religion and diminishing Catholic political authority
C. Evidence (0-3 points)
a) Document Content — Addressing the Topic (1 point)
In order to achieve the first point, the response must use the content of at least three documents to address the
topic of the prompt (1 point). To earn 1 point for evidence from the documents, the response must accurately
describe — rather than simply quote — the content from at least three of the documents to address the topic of
the Catholic Church’s reaction to the Scientific Revolution.
Example of describing the content of a document:
• (Document 2): “In document 2, a letter from Cardinal Bellarmine to Paolo Antonio Foscarini, Cardinal
Bellarmine says that Copernicus’s theory is dangerous, and that interpreting the Bible in your own way
is against the Catholic religion.” (The response provides an accurate summary of the document.)
b Document Content — Supporting an Argument (1 point)
In order to achieve the second point for evidence from the documents, the response needs to support an
argument in response to the prompt by accurately using the content of at least six documents (2 points). The
six documents do not have to be used in support of a single argument, but they can be used across
subarguments or to address counterarguments.

Question 1 — Document-Based Question (continued)
Examples of supporting an argument using the content of a document:
• (Document 1): “The criticism of the Catholic Church for new scientific ideas is apparent, but there was
some acceptance present within the community. The account of a Catholic monk in document 1
expresses the uncertainty in the community of which side to believe. The Catholic monk recognizes
that Copernicus’ theory is valid but after which he mentions how it has been suppressed by the Church
because of its disalignment with the Church’s values.” (The response connects the content of the
document to an argument about the debate on heliocentric ideas within the Catholic Church.)
• (Document 6): “A Jesuit astronomer is shown using new scientific technologies like the telescope to
investigate sunspots. Sunspots proved an imperfection in the Heavenly Bodies which were said by the
Church to be perfect. His investigation and published book go against the belief of the Church.” (The
response successfully uses evidence from the documents to support a line of argument.)
c Evidence beyond the Documents (1 point)
The response must use at least one additional piece of specific historical evidence (beyond that found in the
documents) relevant to an argument that addresses the topic of the Catholic Church’s reaction to the Scientific
Revolution (1 point). To earn this point, the evidence must be described, and it must be more than a phrase or
reference. This additional piece of evidence must be different from the evidence used to earn the point for
contextualization.
Typically, statements credited as contextualization will be more general statements that place an argument or
a significant portion of it in a broader context. Statements credited as evidence from outside the documents
will typically be more specific details relevant to an argument, analogous to the function of evidence drawn
from the documents.
Example of providing an example or additional piece of specific evidence beyond the documents relevant
to an argument that addresses the prompt:
• “Furthermore, Galileo was imprisoned by the Catholic Church for his ‘heretic’ ideas, which implies that
the Church feared that his new ideas regarding science would eventually lead to the deterioration of
power held by the Catholic Church.” (The response provides accurate outside information relevant to an
argument that addresses the prompt.)

Question 1 — Document-Based Question (continued)
D. Analysis and Reasoning (0-2 points)
Document Sourcing (1 point)
For at least three documents, the response explains how or why the document’s point of view, purpose,
historical situation, and/or audience is relevant to an argument that addresses the prompt (1 point). To earn
this point, the response must explain how or why — rather than simply identifying — the document’s point of
view, purpose, historical situation, or audience is relevant to an argument addressing the prompt for each of
the three documents sourced.
Example of acceptable explanation of the significance of the author’s point of view:
• (Document 2): “His point of view is also essential in understanding the Church’s position on new
scientific thought as Bellarmine was a high ranking Cardinal and thus was a reflection of the ideas
held by the Church hierarchy.” (The response provides sourcing regarding the point of view of the author
relevant to his position within the Catholic Church.)
Example of acceptable explanation of the significance of the author’s purpose:
• (Document 1): “The Catholic monk and scientist believed that Copernicus’ theory was right in a book
he wrote. As a Catholic himself he was aware this theory contradicts the Church doctrine. However, he
was still hoping for other people to learn about the new theory and this is his purpose of writing this
book. His audience was other intellectuals like him, he tried to express concerns he had regarding the
church and wanted to get some feedback from his peers.” (The response successfully connects the
document’s purpose to an argument relevant to the topic of the prompt.)
Example of acceptable explanation of the relevance of the historical situation of a document:
• (Document 5): “Galileo asked his daughter to keep the letters from the Pope private. It speaks volumes
that the Pope of the Catholic Church had to be secretive about his support for a scientist.” (The
response successfully connects the document’s historical situation to an argument relevant to the topic of
the prompt.)
Example of acceptable explanation of the significance of the audience:
• (Document 7): “This critique from a Jesuit College is aimed at those who may want to follow Descartes
thoughts and believe it; moreover, by claiming those who may want to follow Descartes reasoning are
heretics, it further shows their intent to keep people from going away from traditional Catholic thinking
like Protestants did.” (The response successfully connects the document’s audience to an argument
relevant to the topic of the prompt.)
Question 1 — Document-Based Question (continued)
Demonstrating Complex Understanding (1 point)
The response demonstrates a complex understanding of the historical motivations and factors that influenced
the Catholic Church’s reaction to the Scientific Revolution, using evidence to corroborate, qualify, or modify an
argument that addresses the question. This understanding must be part of an argument, not merely a phrase or
reference.
Demonstrating a complex understanding might include:
• Explaining nuance of motivation by analyzing how different elements of the Church had different goals
and motivations in dealing with the implications of the Scientific Revolution
• Explaining how the Church both opposed and supported scientific investigation as an attempt of
Church authorities to maintain control over religion, knowledge, and education
• Explaining relevant and insightful connections within and across periods, such as comparing the
response of the Catholic Church to the Scientific Revolution to the Church’s response in dealing with
Luther and the Protestant Reformation
• Confirming the validity of an argument by corroborating multiple perspectives across the documents
and outside evidence
• Qualifying or modifying an argument by considering diverse or alternative views or evidence, such as
pointing out the considerations behind the Church’s reluctance to embrace all aspects of the Scientific
Revolution.
Examples of demonstrating complex understanding:
• The response demonstrates nuance by weaving the documents together to show that while some
elements of the Church hierarchy maintained traditional views, others, such as the Jesuit scholars,
were more willing to question tradition and engage with the new discoveries of the Scientific
Revolution.
• The response uses multiple causes of the Reformation and wars of religion to show that the Church
was concerned about losing its authority and was considering the benefits and drawbacks of new
scientific ideas such as heliocentrism. These ideas could be seen as undermining Scripture, but also
risked undermining the Church if empirically verifiable observations and discoveries were rejected.
• Using documents and outside evidence, the response corroborates its claim that the Church hardened
its stance over time, using the example of Galileo’s heresy trial as evidence, as well as the Inquisition
and the rejection of Descartes’s and Newton’s models of the universe.
• The response connects the Church’s actions in the 1500s in response to the Protestant Reformation
and the wars of religion with the Church’s actions in response to the new science.
]