Content from Bethany Allen: [

American Revolution Slides: [

Vocabulary : [

Tyranny - a ruler who uses government power unfairly
Repeal - to take back or cancel a law
Boycott - to refuse to buy one or more goods from a certain source
Salutary neglect - the unofficial British policy where rules and laws were not enforced on the American colonies
]
French & Indian War : [

In the 1750s, Great Britain and the colonies fought a war against the French and their Native American allies
The war started when Britain and France could not agree on the boundaries of their North American colonies.
A young George Washington was an important general during this war.
In the end, the British won the war
Treaty of Paris of 1763 ended the war officially
France was forced to give all their colonies in North America to Spain and Britain
Britain also gained Florida from Spain
]

After the War: [

The war left Britain in massive debt. This led to the British government passing new laws that affected the colonies.

King George III issued the Proclamation of 1763, telling colonists they could not move past the Appalachian Mountains

Colonists were very angry at this new rule, since they saw that land as theirs.
They began to see King George as a tyrant

Many people had already moved west of the boundary line.
The British sent 7,500 troops to enforce the new rule

Another reason they did not like this rule was because of salutary neglect
Colonists were used to not having to follow British laws
]

Comprehension Check
What was the outcome of the French and Indian War?

Stamp Act: [
    The British government has to find a way to solve their money problems.
People in Great Britain were already taxed a lot.
American colonists paid very few taxes. 
Prime Minister George Grenville decided it was time for them to pay.
In 1765, Grenville had the Stamp Act passed. 
It required colonists to buy a stamp for all paper goods.
Not all colonists were mad at the tax itself. 
They were upset that they had no vote on the taxes that were imposed on them. 
These colonists adopted the slogan “No Taxation without Representation” 
Loyalists simply refused to buy stamps. 
Patriots protested.
One mob arose called the Sons of Liberty.
The sons of liberty attacked the homes of tax collectors. 
One collector in CT was buried alive, only to be saved when he resigned.
British government repealed the Stamp Act. 
Colonists celebrated, playing music in the street and ringing church bells. 

]

Comprehension Check
Why were many colonists so upset about the Stamp Act?

Quartering Act
Required colonists to provide housing and food to British troops.


Quartering Act
New York refused to fund British housing, and the government forbid their assembly from meeting until they did. 

Townshend Acts
Passed by Parliament member Charles Townshend.
Intended to be more forceful than previous acts. 
Taxed many things, such as glass, paint, paper, and tea.

The Boycott: [
    Once again, colonists did not want to pay taxes that their assemblies did not vote on.
They refused to buy all British goods.
The most important group during the boycott was women. 
They did the shopping, so it was up to them to make this work. 
Women sewed clothes, made their own tea from pine needles, and only bought American-made goods. 
Seeing that they were losing money, Parliament repealed the Townshend Acts, except the tax on tea. 
King George III refused to give up on taxing Americans.  

]

Comprehension Check
How did colonists fight back against taxation?

Vocabulary: [

Patriot - colonist who rejected British rule and rebelled against the King
Loyalist - colonist who supported British rule and the King
Militia - a small army made up of ordinary citizens who are trained to fight in an emergency
Massacre - a brutal slaughter of a large number of people
Propaganda - communication that is used to influence or persuade an audience to further an agenda
]

Boston Massacre: [
    Tensions were building in Boston.
The Sons of Liberty were stirring up a lot of trouble, while British soldiers had a large presence in the city.   The soldiers in Boston were treated poorly and called Lobsterbacks.
The troops were not allowed to cause trouble with citizens.  A fight broke out between British soldiers and colonists in Boston. 
Patriots called it a massacre, but it was really a riot. 
A mob of colonists gathered, taunting the soldiers and throwing snowballs and rocks at them. 
A shot was fired, and the soldiers panicked and opened fire on the crowd. 
5 colonists were left dead. 
The first to be killed was Crispus Attucks, a free black man. He is regarded as the first death in the American Revolution. 
Loyalists were not very bothered by the tax on tea. 
Patriots continued to protest all taxes by the British. 
The British’s tea company was going broke. 
The Tea Act lowered the cost of tea so much that, even with a tax, it was cheaper than smuggled tea. 
The Act also said that merchants could sell no other tea except for British tea. 
When tea ships arrived, mobs would send them away, still full of tea. 
The British Navy in Boston blocked in a cargo ship, saying it would not leave until it was unloaded. 
60 Sons of Liberty disguised as Native Americans boarded the ship at night.
They dumped 90,000 pounds of tea into the Boston Harbor. 
John Adams, a Son of Liberty, wrote of the event, ““This is the most magnificent moment of all. This destruction of the tea is so bold, so daring, so firm . . . it must have . . . important consequences.”

]

The Intolerable Acts : [
    Hearing about the Boston Tea Party, King George III decided the fight was no longer about taxes, but about controlling the colonies. 
The Boston Harbor was closed
Massachusetts was no longer self-governing
Criminal trials would be held in England, instead of the colonies 
Even more British troops were sent to Boston
The acts did not quiet the colonies
Colonies began to unite together to help Massachusetts
The assembly of Virginia said “An attack made on one of our sister colonies is an attack made on all British America.”

]

First Continental Congress
In 1774, 50 leaders from 12 colonies met in Philadelphia
Patriots, Loyalists, and Neutralists all attended
They decided to send respectful letters to King George and ask him to listen to their concerns

Militias: [

The colonies also formed militias
Some volunteers called themselves minutemen, because they could be ready to fight within 60 seconds
]

Lexington and Concord: [

In April 1775, a spy told the British that colonists were hiding gunpowder and weapons in Concord.
700 troops marched to Concord at night to take the weapons.
The news reached Lexington, a town on the way to Concord
Minutemen gathered and waited for the British to come through
As the British arrived, a shot rang out. 
Nobody knows who fired the shot, but both sides began to fire on each other. 
That first shot is known as “The Shot Heard ‘Round the World” because it truly began the war. 
8 colonists died, 10 were injured
The British continued their march to Concord
They arrived by morning, but the weapons were hidden
A larger group of minutemen showed up to fight
After some shots fired, the British fled 
Their route back to Boston was lined with more minutemen, who shot at them as the passed by 
Casualties:

British - 74 dead, 200 wounded/missing
Americans - 49 dead, 41 wounded

Comprehension Check
Why do you think they called the first gunfire at Lexington the “Shot Heard ‘Round the World”?

]



Vocabulary: [
    Petition - a formal, written request made to an official person or organization
Natural rights - rights common to everyone, as opposed to those given by law
Treason - the crime of betraying one's country

Second Continental Congress
May 1775, the Congress met again in Philadelphia
They decided to form a Continental Army, bringing troops from all the colonies together. 

Second Continental Congress
To lead this army, John Adams proposed “a Gentleman whose Skill and Experience as an Officer, whose . . . great Talents and excellent universal Character, would [unite] the colonies better than any other person alive.” 

Second Continental Congress
The job of Commander of the Continental Army was unanimously given to George Washington

Comprehension Check
What difference do you see between the attitudes colonists had at the First Continental Congress vs. the Second?

Battle of Bunker Hill
Boston militiamen made plans to take two hills that overlooked Boston: Bunker Hill and Breed's Hill

Battle of Bunker Hill
2,000 British troops formed two long lines at the base of Breed's Hill and began to march up

]


Battle of Bunker Hill: [

When the British got close, the militia began to fire. 
The British fell back in confusion, but continued and overtook both hills
The British lost 1,000 men and realized how difficult winning would be. 
]


Washington Takes Over: [

Washington brought together his army, a group that was very mixed and disorganized
He had to bring them from a rag-tag group to an official standing army 

]


Siege of Boston: [
    Under Washington’s command, soldiers stole weapons and supplies from British forts in New York 
Among these supplies were 59 cannons which were placed on sleds and dragged 300 miles to Boston
On March 4, 1776, the British awoke to see the nearby hills covered in cannons, pointed at Boston
They fled Boston, carrying 9,000 troops and 1,100 Loyalists to Canada

]


Olive Branch Petition: [
    In July 1775, colonists sent King George a letter asking him to end the fighting. 
They called it an “olive branch” which is a symbol of peace
King George did not call a truce, but said that the colonies were “in open rebellion” and must be stopped

]

Common Sense: [
    Many colonists were still not convinced that they should break away from Britain
Patriot Thomas Paine wrote and distributed a pamphlet urging the people to abandon their loyalty to the King 
Within a few months, more than 120,000 copies of Common Sense were printed in the colonies. 
Paine's arguments persuaded thousands of colonists that independence was the key to a brighter future.

]

Comprehension Check
If you were a colonist, would you agree more with the Olive Branch Petition or Common Sense?

Declaration of Independence: [
    On July 2, 1776, all but one of the colonies’ delegates voted to declare independence
Some delegates called for a small revision to Jefferson’s work
After removing a passage that condemned slavery, all delegates approved the DoI
On July 4, 1776, they all signed it
Every signer understood that it was an act of treason against Britain
Benjamin Franklin told the delegates, “We must all hang together, or assuredly we shall all hang separately.”

]

Comprehension Check
What did Franklin mean?

Vocabulary: [
Mercenary - a professional soldier hired to serve in a foreign army
Bayonet - spike-shaped weapon designed to fit on the end of a rifle
Guerilla warfare - use of military tactics including ambushes, sabotage, and hit-and-runs
Traditional warfare - Type of warfare in which two sides face each other on the battlefield and fight, often in neat rows
]

African Americans and the War: [
    Even before the DoI, African Americans joined the Patriots
Black militiamen fought at Lexington, Concord, and Bunker Hill
Washington banned black men from serving in the Continental Army, because he did not want the army to become a place for escaped slaves to hide
Because the Continental Army was short on soldiers, Washington changed his policy later in the war and allowed black men to fight

]

Battle of Long Island: [
    August 1776, American and British armies met in Brooklyn, NY
The superior skills of the British army brought them a victory in 2 days
Britain took control of all of New York City
Casualties:
Britain - 337 dead
America - 1,407 dead
After this defeat, the British chased the Continental Army out of New York, New Jersey, and across the Delaware into Pennsylvania

]

Battle of Trenton: [
    Washington knew he had to build morale quickly
It was customary for armies to halt fighting during holidays, but Washington had a plan
On the evening of December 25, 1776, his army crossed the icy Delaware River in small boats
On the shore in Trenton NJ, Washington whispered to his men, “Victory or death”
Their guns were too wet to fire, so they relied on only their bayonets
They snuck up on the sleeping British soldiers, who immediately surrendered
They took 868 prisoners without a single casualty
This victory boosted American morale and helped keep the US in the war
One loyalist wrote “They are all liberty mad again”

]

Battle of Saratoga: [
    The British hatched a plan to separate the rebels by controlling the Hudson River Valley, so they headed to Albany, NY
By the time the British army reached Saratoga Springs, the Continental Army was waiting for them
The Americans outnumbered the British, and defeated them easily
Before Saratoga, most of the world thought the Americans would lose the war. 
After Saratoga, the French joined the US as an ally in the war
France sent money, troops, guns, and ships
After France joined the war, Spain began to help as well

]

Valley Forge:[
    The Continental Army made camp for the winter of 1777 at Valley Forge, PA
One soldier wrote, “We had nothing to eat for two or three days previous. . . . But we must now have what Congress said, a sumptuous [lavish] Thanksgiving. . . . It gave each and every man a gill [a few ounces] of rice and a tablespoon of vinegar! The army was now not only starved but naked. The greatest part were not only shirtless and barefoot, but destitute of [without] all other clothing, especially blankets.
Merchants and farmers would only sell to the British, who occupied nearby Philadelphia
More men died during the winter at Valley Forge than in battle
Baron Friedrich von Steuben (Prussia) took soldiers’ minds off their conditions by providing drills and training
Marquis de Lafayette (France) also joined the men in Valley Forge, using his riches to buy them clothes and blankets

]

Battle of Monmouth:[
    The British abandoned Philadelphia for NYC
Washington’s troop chased them, catching up at Monmouth NJ 
The British slipped across the Hudson into safety in NYC
]

Moving South:[
    The British gave up on winning the war in the north and moved south, where they thought they would have more Loyalist support
What the British did not see coming was the amount of guerillas hiding in the Carolinas 
The British were trained in traditional warfare and were unprepared for such tactics
The British troops, tired of being chased around the south, settled at Yorktown, VA to rest

]
Battle of Yorktown:[
    Washington moved his men to Virginia and surrounded the British on land, while the French trapped them by sea with 29 ships 
Both sides fired on each other for several days, until the British finally surrendered on October 19, 1781
8,000 British troops gave up their guns and were escorted out of Yorktown by the Continental Army
As the British marched out of Yorktown, their band played “The World Turned Upside Down”

]

Treaty of Paris of 1783[

3 Parts:
Great Britain recognized the US as an independent nation
Great Britain gave up all its territory south of Canada
All rights and property taken from Loyalists during the war would be returned to them 
]

]
]