Content from Bobby:[
Penguin Slides: `Few animals have evolved to survive the unforgiving Antarctic like penguins. Species like the emperor penguin have overlapping layers of
 insulating plumage, tightly packed veins to recycle body heat and just enough paunch to weather wind chills that approach minus 80 degrees Fahrenheit. 
 With all these cold-weather adaptations, it’s difficult to envision penguins living anywhere else. But fossils of ancient penguins have popped up along the 
 Equator, and many of these prehistoric seabirds predate the formation of Antarctica’s ice sheets. “They lived through some of the hottest times in Earth’s
  history, when it was five degrees warmer at the Equator,” said Daniel Ksepka, a paleontologist at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich, Conn. “They basically 
  evolved in an ice-free context.” To determine how penguins transitioned from balmy, tropical waters to polar seas, Dr. Ksepka and his colleagues recently
   analyzed the genomes of all living penguins, including pipsqueaks like the foot-tall blue penguin, rarities like the endangered yellow-eyed penguin and 
   showstoppers like the yellow-tufted rockhopper penguin. However, the genetics of modern penguins could tell the researchers only so much. Most modern 
   lineages date back only a couple million years, obscuring most of the 60-million-year odyssey of penguin evolution. Dr. Ksepka said that more than 
   three-quarters of all penguin species “are extinct now.” He added, “You have to look at the fossil record, or you’re only getting a fragment of the
    story.” ADVERTISEMENT SKIP ADVERTISEMENT To complement the modern data, the researchers examined fossils from a motley crew of ancient seafarers.
     Some prehistoric penguins plied tropical waters off Peru, using spearlike bills to harpoon fish. Others sported long legs, and the largest may have 
     pushed seven feet tall. Some even had patches of rusty red feathers. Comparing the genomes of modern penguins with fossil penguins allowed the team 
     to reconstruct penguin evolution. In their findings, published Tuesday in Nature Communications, the researchers pinpointed genes that helped penguins
      transition from wading through warm waters to perfecting the polar plunge. Some of these genes aided penguins’ ability to pack on blubber, while
       others molded their shriveled wings into streamlined flippers. Some even bolstered penguins’ immune systems or helped them tolerate low oxygen during
        deep dives. Image At the Natural History Museum in Lima, Peru, the paleontologist Rodolfo Salas examined the cranium of a giant fossil penguin,
         which lived 36 million years ago and was about five feet tall and weighed 130 pounds. At the Natural History Museum in Lima, Peru, the 
         paleontologist Rodolfo Salas examined the cranium of a giant fossil penguin, which lived 36 million years ago and was about five feet tall and 
         weighed 130 pounds.Credit...Mariana Bazo/Reuters The researchers also identified genes that helped fine-tune penguin eyes to peer through icy
          depths. Whereas most birds have four color cones in their eyes, one of these is inactive in penguins, hampering their ability to see green and 
          red. Instead, their eyes have adapted to adjust to the ambient blue of the ocean. Some missing genes were perplexing to the researchers. While 
          modern penguins gobble krill, the team found evidence that their ancestors lacked genes that would have helped break down crustacean shells. This
           may be evidence that ancient penguins were spearing larger prey, like fish and squid. Penguins retain a restricted palate. Their taste receptors
            can pick up only salty and sour tastes, which is “pretty good if you’re eating fish,” Dr. Ksepka said. “That’s probably why they’re pretty happy
             with sardines.” ADVERTISEMENT SKIP ADVERTISEMENT When these changes occurred in ancient penguins, they stuck. The genetic analyses revealed 
             that penguins generally have the lowest evolutionary rate of any group of birds. Because they look so bizarre, this glacial rate of change 
             seems surprising. But it reveals how successful the penguin’s plump yet streamlined body plan is — over millions of years, it has changed 
             only in slow increments. But emperor penguins, which breed during the bitter Antarctic winter, have the highest evolutionary rate of any 
             penguin, leading the researchers to deduce that colder temperatures somehow speed penguin evolution. Juliana Vianna, an ecologist at the
              Pontifical Catholic University of Chile, says this idea is consistent with the southward march of penguins occurring during bouts of 
              global cooling. “Their evolutionary history is pretty much associated with historical climate change and glaciation,” said Dr. Vianna, 
              who recently led similar research but was not involved in the new study. Understanding how penguins changed in the past may offer clues to 
              how these cold-weather specialists could fare in a hotter future. “Warming temperatures will impact the biogeographic ranges of penguins, the
               species they rely on as food and the species that, in turn, hunt them,” said Daniel Thomas, a paleontologist from Massey University in New
                Zealand and an author of the new study. While the research is a comprehensive look at the penguin family, Dr. Ksepka said, there’s still 
                one seabird missing — the last flying penguin. The small, puffinlike bird probably lived in ancient New Zealand, but its fossils have proved 
                elusive. “That would be the No. 1 thing I’d ask for if I had a genie,” he said.`

Cat Article: `Will cats, which require meat, eventually evolve to eat a broader array of foods as dogs do?

Cats and dogs belong to a group of mammals known as Carnivora, and the wild ancestors of both species dined primarily on meat. Recent DNA analyses indicate that
 over the course of their evolution, dogs have acquired more copies of the so-called amylase gene, which makes an enzyme that helps to break down starch. Having
  more copies of this gene has allowed dogs to eat a more omnivorous diet. In contrast, the cat family, known as Felidae, lost the genes that encode several key 
  enzymes—including those that manufacture vitamin A, prostaglandins and the amino acid taurine—early in its evolution. Whereas dogs (and humans) can synthesize
   these substances from plant-based precursors, cats have to obtain them from meat. To expand their diet, cats would have to evolve physiological traits that allow
    them to synthesize these and other key nutrients from plant foods. This capacity has not emerged during the 10 million years of felid evolution, so it seems 
    unlikely to arise spontaneously in our domestic cats.

Why do cats purr?

Cats purr because they have something to say, which roughly translated is “please keep still and pay attention to me.” Kittens purr to persuade their mothers to 
keep on nursing them, and pet cats purr when they want to be stroked. The vibrations emanating from the purr certainly have a calming effect on people. Yet sick 
cats will also purr as a cry for help. So purring doesn’t always mean “I’m happy.” Some researchers have claimed that the vibrations from purring might help heal
 bone damage in an injured cat.`


]