CA Algebra 2 Standards : [
    Building on their work with linear, quadratic, and exponential functions, students extend their repertoire of functions to include
logarithmic, polynomial, rational, and radical functions in the Algebra II course. This course includes standards from the
conceptual categories of Number and Quantity, Algebra, Functions, Geometry, and Statistics and Probability. Some standards
are repeated in multiple higher mathematics courses; therefore instructional notes, which appear in brackets, indicate what is
appropriate for study in this particular course. Standards that were limited in Algebra I no longer have those restrictions in
Algebra II. Students work closely with the expressions that define the functions, competently manipulate algebraic expressions,
and continue to expand and hone their abilities to model situations and to solve equations, including solving quadratic
equations over the set of complex numbers and solving exponential equations using the properties of logarithms.
For the Algebra II course, instructional time should focus on four critical areas: (1) relate arithmetic of rational expressions
to arithmetic of rational numbers; (2) expand understandings of functions and graphing to include trigonometric functions;
(3) synthesize and generalize functions and extend understanding of exponential functions to logarithmic functions; and
(4) relate data display and summary statistics to probability and explore a variety of data collection methods.
(1) A central theme of this Algebra II course is that the arithmetic of rational expressions is governed by the same rules as
the arithmetic of rational numbers. Students explore the structural similarities between the system of polynomials and the
system of integers. They draw on analogies between polynomial arithmetic and base-ten computation, focusing on properties of operations, particularly the distributive property. Connections are made between multiplication of polynomials with
multiplication of multi-digit integers, and division of polynomials with long division of integers. Students identify zeros of
polynomials, including complex zeros of quadratic polynomials, and make connections between zeros of polynomials and
solutions of polynomial equations. The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra is examined.
(2) Building on their previous work with functions and on their work with trigonometric ratios and circles in the Geometry
course, students now use the coordinate plane to extend trigonometry to model periodic phenomena.
(3) Students synthesize and generalize what they have learned about a variety of function families. They extend their work with
exponential functions to include solving exponential equations with logarithms. They explore the effects of transformations
on graphs of diverse functions, including functions arising in an application, in order to abstract the general principle that
transformations on a graph always have the same effect regardless of the type of the underlying function. They identify
appropriate types of functions to model a situation, they adjust parameters to improve the model, and they compare
models by analyzing appropriateness of fit and making judgments about the domain over which a model is a good fit. The
description of modeling as “the process of choosing and using mathematics and statistics to analyze empirical situations,
to understand them better, and to make decisions” is at the heart of this Algebra II course. The narrative discussion and
diagram of the modeling cycle should be considered when knowledge of functions, statistics, and geometry is applied in a
modeling context.
(4) Students see how the visual displays and summary statistics they learned in earlier grades relate to different types of data
and to probability distributions. They identify different ways of collecting data—including sample surveys, experiments, and
simulations—and consider how randomness and careful design affect the conclusions that can be drawn.
The Standards for Mathematical Practice complement the content standards so that students increasingly engage with the
subject matter as they grow in mathematical maturity and expertise throughout the elementary, middle, and high school years.1
Number and Quantity
The Complex Number System N-CN
Perform arithmetic operations with complex numbers.
1. Know there is a complex number i such that i
2 = −1, and every complex number has the form a + bi with a and b real.
2. Use the relation i
2
 = −1 and the commutative, associative, and distributive properties to add, subtract, and multiply
complex numbers.
Use complex numbers in polynomial identities and equations. [Polynomials with real coefficients]
7. Solve quadratic equations with real coefficients that have complex solutions.
8. (+) Extend polynomial identities to the complex numbers. For example, rewrite x2
 + 4 as (x + 2i)(x – 2i).
9. (+) Know the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra; show that it is true for quadratic polynomials.
Algebra
Seeing Structure in Expressions A-SSE
Interpret the structure of expressions. [Polynomial and rational]
1. Interpret expressions that represent a quantity in terms of its context. -
a. Interpret parts of an expression, such as terms, factors, and coefficients. -
b. Interpret complicated expressions by viewing one or more of their parts as a single entity. For example, interpret
P(1 + r)n
 as the product of P and a factor not depending on P. -
2. Use the structure of an expression to identify ways to rewrite it.
Write expressions in equivalent forms to solve problems.
4. Derive the formula for the sum of a finite geometric series (when the common ratio is not 1), and use the formula to solve
problems. For example, calculate mortgage payments. -
Arithmetic with Polynomials and Rational Expressions A-APR
Perform arithmetic operations on polynomials. [Beyond quadratic]
1. Understand that polynomials form a system analogous to the integers, namely, they are closed under the operations of
addition, subtraction, and multiplication; add, subtract, and multiply polynomials.
Understand the relationship between zeros and factors of polynomials.
2. Know and apply the Remainder Theorem: For a polynomial p(x) and a number a, the remainder on division by x – a is p(a),
so p(a) = 0 if and only if (x – a) is a factor of p(x).
3. Identify zeros of polynomials when suitable factorizations are available, and use the zeros to construct a rough graph of
the function defined by the polynomial. 1
Use polynomial identities to solve problems.
4. Prove polynomial identities and use them to describe numerical relationships. For example, the polynomial identity
(x2
 + y2
)
2
= (x2
 – y2
)
2
 + (2xy)2
 can be used to generate Pythagorean triples.
5. (+) Know and apply the Binomial Theorem for the expansion of (x + y)n
 in powers of x and y for a positive integer n, where
x and y are any numbers, with coefficients determined for example by Pascal’s Triangle.12
Rewrite rational expressions. [Linear and quadratic denominators]
6. Rewrite simple rational expressions in different forms; write a(x)/b(x) in the form q(x) + r(x)/b(x), where a(x), b(x), q(x),
and r(x) are polynomials with the degree of r(x) less than the degree of b(x), using inspection, long division, or, for the more
complicated examples, a computer algebra system.
7. (+) Understand that rational expressions form a system analogous to the rational numbers, closed under addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division by a nonzero rational expression; add, subtract, multiply, and divide rational expressions.
Creating Equations A-CED
Create equations that describe numbers or relationships. [Equations using all available types of expressions, including simple
root functions]
1. Create equations and inequalities in one variable including ones with absolute value and use them to solve problems.
Include equations arising from linear and quadratic functions, and simple rational and exponential functions. CA -
2. Create equations in two or more variables to represent relationships between quantities; graph equations on coordinate
axes with labels and scales. -
3. Represent constraints by equations or inequalities, and by systems of equations and/or inequalities, and interpret solutions
as viable or non-viable options in a modeling context. -
4. Rearrange formulas to highlight a quantity of interest, using the same reasoning as in solving equations. -
Reasoning with Equations and Inequalities A-REI
Understand solving equations as a process of reasoning and explain the reasoning. [Simple radical and rational]
2. Solve simple rational and radical equations in one variable, and give examples showing how extraneous solutions may arise.
Solve equations and inequalities in one variable.
3.1 Solve one-variable equations and inequalities involving absolute value, graphing the solutions and interpreting them in
context. CA
Represent and solve equations and inequalities graphically. [Combine polynomial, rational, radical, absolute value, and
exponential functions.]
11. Explain why the x-coordinates of the points where the graphs of the equations y = f(x) and y = g(x) intersect are the solutions
of the equation f(x) = g(x); find the solutions approximately, e.g., using technology to graph the functions, make tables of
values, or find successive approximations. Include cases where f(x) and/or g(x) are linear, polynomial, rational, absolute
value, exponential, and logarithmic functions
Functions
Interpreting Functions F-IF
Interpret functions that arise in applications in terms of the context. [Emphasize selection of appropriate models.]
4. For a function that models a relationship between two quantities, interpret key features of graphs and tables in terms of
the quantities, and sketch graphs showing key features given a verbal description of the relationship. Key features include:
intercepts; intervals where the function is increasing, decreasing, positive, or negative; relative maximums and minimums;
symmetries; end behavior; and periodicity. -
5. Relate the domain of a function to its graph and, where applicable, to the quantitative relationship it describes. -
6. Calculate and interpret the average rate of change of a function (presented symbolically or as a table) over a specified
interval. Estimate the rate of change from a graph. -
Analyze functions using different representations. [Focus on using key features to guide selection of appropriate type of model
function.]
7. Graph functions expressed symbolically and show key features of the graph, by hand in simple cases and using technology
for more complicated cases. -
b. Graph square root, cube root, and piecewise-defined functions, including step functions and absolute value functions. -
c. Graph polynomial functions, identifying zeros when suitable factorizations are available, and showing end behavior. -
e. Graph exponential and logarithmic functions, showing intercepts and end behavior, and trigonometric functions, showing
period, midline, and amplitude. -
8. Write a function defined by an expression in different but equivalent forms to reveal and explain different properties of the
function.
9. Compare properties of two functions each represented in a different way (algebraically, graphically, numerically in tables, or
by verbal descriptions).
Building Functions F-BF
Build a function that models a relationship between two quantities. [Include all types of functions studied.]
1. Write a function that describes a relationship between two quantities.-
b. Combine standard function types using arithmetic operations. For example, build a function that models the temperature
of a cooling body by adding a constant function to a decaying exponential, and relate these functions to the model. -
Build new functions from existing functions. [Include simple radical, rational, and exponential functions; emphasize common
effect of each transformation across function types.]
3. Identify the effect on the graph of replacing f(x) by f(x) + k, kf(x), f(kx), and f(x + k) for specific values of k (both positive
and negative); find the value of k given the graphs. Experiment with cases and illustrate an explanation of the effects on the
graph using technology. Include recognizing even and odd functions from their graphs and algebraic expressions for them.
4. Find inverse functions.
a. Solve an equation of the form f(x) = c for a simple function f that has an inverse and write an expression for the inverse.
For example, f(x) =2x3
 or f(x) = (x + 1)/(x − 1) for x ≠ 1.
 Linear, Quadratic, and Exponential Models F-LE
Construct and compare linear, quadratic, and exponential models and solve problems.
4. For exponential models, express as a logarithm the solution to abct = d where a, c, and d are numbers and the base b is 2,
10, or e; evaluate the logarithm using technology. - [Logarithms as solutions for exponentials]
4.1 Prove simple laws of logarithms. CA -
4.2 Use the definition of logarithms to translate between logarithms in any base. CA -
4.3 Understand and use the properties of logarithms to simplify logarithmic numeric expressions and to identify their
approximate values. CA -
Trigonometric Functions F-TF
Extend the domain of trigonometric functions using the unit circle.
1. Understand radian measure of an angle as the length of the arc on the unit circle subtended by the angle.
2. Explain how the unit circle in the coordinate plane enables the extension of trigonometric functions to all real numbers,
interpreted as radian measures of angles traversed counterclockwise around the unit circle.
2.1 Graph all 6 basic trigonometric functions. CA
Model periodic phenomena with trigonometric functions.
5. Choose trigonometric functions to model periodic phenomena with specified amplitude, frequency, and midline. -
Prove and apply trigonometric identities.
8. Prove the Pythagorean identity sin2
(θ ) + cos2
(θ ) = 1 and use it to find sin(θ ), cos(θ ), or tan(θ ) given sin(θ ), cos(θ ),
or tan(θ ) and the quadrant of the angle.
Geometry
Expressing Geometric Properties with Equations G-GPE
Translate between the geometric description and the equation for a conic section.
3.1 Given a quadratic equation of the form ax2
 + by2
 + cx + dy + e = 0, use the method for completing the square to put the
equation into standard form; identify whether the graph of the equation is a circle, ellipse, parabola, or hyperbola and
graph the equation. [In Algebra II, this standard addresses only circles and parabolas.] CA
Statistics and Probability
Interpreting Categorical and Quantitative Data S-ID
Summarize, represent, and interpret data on a single count or measurement variable.
4. Use the mean and standard deviation of a data set to fit it to a normal distribution and to estimate population percentages.
Recognize that there are data sets for which such a procedure is not appropriate. Use calculators, spreadsheets, and tables
to estimate areas under the normal curve. -
Making Inferences and Justifying Conclusions S-IC
Understand and evaluate random processes underlying statistical experiments.
1. Understand statistics as a process for making inferences about population parameters based on a random sample from
that population. -
2. Decide if a specified model is consistent with results from a given data-generating process, e.g., using simulation. For
example, a model says a spinning coin falls heads up with probability 0.5. Would a result of 5 tails in a row cause you to
question the model? -
Make inferences and justify conclusions from sample surveys, experiments, and observational studies.
3. Recognize the purposes of and differences among sample surveys, experiments, and observational studies; explain how
randomization relates to each. -
4. Use data from a sample survey to estimate a population mean or proportion; develop a margin of error through the use of
simulation models for random sampling. -
5. Use data from a randomized experiment to compare two treatments; use simulations to decide if differences between
parameters are significant. -
6. Evaluate reports based on data. -
Using Probability to Make Decisions S-MD
Use probability to evaluate outcomes of decisions. [Include more complex situations.]
6. (+) Use probabilities to make fair decisions (e.g., drawing by lots, using a random number generator). -
7. (+) Analyze decisions and strategies using probability concepts (e.g., product testing, medical testing, pulling a hockey
goalie at the end of a game). -
]