CCSS 5th grade Math: [
    Overview: {
        Operations and Algebraic Thinking
-Write and interpret numerical expressions.
-Analyze patterns and relationships.
Number and Operations in Base Ten
-Understand the place value system.
-Perform operations with multi-digit whole numbers and with
decimals to hundredths.
Number and Operations—Fractions
-Use equivalent fractions as a strategy to add and subtract
fractions.
-Apply and extend previous understandings of multiplication
and division to multiply and divide fractions.
Measurement and Data
-Convert like measurement units within a given measurement
system.
-Represent and interpret data.
-Geometric measurement: understand concepts of volume and relate volume to multiplication and to addition.
Geometry
-Graph points on the coordinate plane to solve real-world and mathematical problems.
-Classify two-dimensional figures into categories based on their properties.
    },
    Operations and Algebraic Thinking: {
        Write and interpret numerical expressions.
        1. Use parentheses, brackets, or braces in numerical expressions, and evaluate expressions with these symbols.
        2. Write simple expressions that record calculations with numbers, and interpret numerical expressions without evaluating
        them. For example, express the calculation “add 8 and 7, then multiply by 2” as 2 × (8 + 7). Recognize that
        3 × (18932 + 921) is three times as large as 18932 + 921, without having to calculate the indicated sum or product.
        2.1 Express a whole number in the range 2–50 as a product of its prime factors. For example, find the prime factors of 24 and
        express 24 as 2 × 2 × 2 × 3. CA
        Analyze patterns and relationships.
        3. Generate two numerical patterns using two given rules. Identify apparent relationships between corresponding terms. Form
        ordered pairs consisting of corresponding terms from the two patterns, and graph the ordered pairs on a coordinate plane.
        For example, given the rule “Add 3” and the starting number 0, and given the rule “Add 6” and the starting number 0,
        generate terms in the resulting sequences, and observe that the terms in one sequence are twice the corresponding terms
        in the other sequence. Explain informally why this is so.
    },
    Number and Operations in Base Ten : {
        Understand the place value system.
        1. Recognize that in a multi-digit number, a digit in one place represents 10 times as much as it represents in the place to its
        right and 1/10 of what it represents in the place to its left.
        2. Explain patterns in the number of zeros of the product when multiplying a number by powers of 10, and explain patterns in
        the placement of the decimal point when a decimal is multiplied or divided by a power of 10. Use whole-number exponents
        to denote powers of 10.
        3. Read, write, and compare decimals to thousandths.
        a. Read and write decimals to thousandths using base-ten numerals, number names, and expanded form, e.g.,
        347.392 = 3 × 100 + 4 × 10 + 7 × 1 + 3 × (1/10) + 9 × (1/100) + 2 × (1/1000).
        b. Compare two decimals to thousandths based on meanings of the digits in each place, using >, =, and < symbols to
        record the results of comparisons.
        4. Use place value understanding to round decimals to any place.
        Perform operations with multi-digit whole numbers and with decimals to hundredths.
        5. Fluently multiply multi-digit whole numbers using the standard algorithm.
        6. Find whole-number quotients of whole numbers with up to four-digit dividends and two-digit divisors, using strategies based
        on place value, the properties of operations, and/or the relationship between multiplication and division. Illustrate and
        explain the calculation by using equations, rectangular arrays, and/or area models.
        7. Add, subtract, multiply, and divide decimals to hundredths, using concrete models or drawings and strategies based on
        place value, properties of operations, and/or the relationship between addition and subtraction; relate the strategy to a
        written method and explain the reasoning used
    },
    Number and Operations—Fractions: {
        Use equivalent fractions as a strategy to add and subtract fractions.
1. Add and subtract fractions with unlike denominators (including mixed numbers) by replacing given fractions with equivalent
fractions in such a way as to produce an equivalent sum or difference of fractions with like denominators. For example,
2/3 + 5/4 = 8/12 + 15/12 = 23/12. (In general, a/b + c/d = (ad + bc)/bd.)
2. Solve word problems involving addition and subtraction of fractions referring to the same whole, including cases of unlike
denominators, e.g., by using visual fraction models or equations to represent the problem. Use benchmark fractions and
number sense of fractions to estimate mentally and assess the reasonableness of answers. For example, recognize an
incorrect result 2/5 + 1/2 = 3/7, by observing that 3/7 < 1/2.
Apply and extend previous understandings of multiplication and division to multiply and divide fractions.
3. Interpret a fraction as division of the numerator by the denominator (a/b = a ÷ b). Solve word problems involving division
of whole numbers leading to answers in the form of fractions or mixed numbers, e.g., by using visual fraction models or
equations to represent the problem. For example, interpret 3/4 as the result of dividing 3 by 4, noting that 3/4 multiplied
by 4 equals 3, and that when 3 wholes are shared equally among 4 people each person has a share of size 3/4. If 9 people
want to share a 50-pound sack of rice equally by weight, how many pounds of rice should each person get? Between what
two whole numbers does your answer lie?
4. Apply and extend previous understandings of multiplication to multiply a fraction or whole number by a fraction.
a. Interpret the product (a/b) × q as a parts of a partition of q into b equal parts; equivalently, as the result of a sequence
of operations a × q ÷ b. For example, use a visual fraction model to show (2/3) × 4 = 8/3, and create a story context
for this equation. Do the same with (2/3) × (4/5) = 8/15. (In general, (a/b) × (c/d) = ac/bd.)
b. Find the area of a rectangle with fractional side lengths by tiling it with unit squares of the appropriate unit fraction side
lengths, and show that the area is the same as would be found by multiplying the side lengths. Multiply fractional side
lengths to find areas of rectangles, and represent fraction products as rectangular areas.
5. Interpret multiplication as scaling (resizing), by:
a. Comparing the size of a product to the size of one factor on the basis of the size of the other factor, without performing
the indicated multiplication.
b. Explaining why multiplying a given number by a fraction greater than 1 results in a product greater than the given
number (recognizing multiplication by whole numbers greater than 1 as a familiar case); explaining why multiplying a
given number by a fraction less than 1 results in a product smaller than the given number; and relating the principle of
fraction equivalence a/b = (n × a)/(n × b) to the effect of multiplying a/b by 1.
6. Solve real-world problems involving multiplication of fractions and mixed numbers, e.g., by using visual fraction models or
equations to represent the problem.
7. Apply and extend previous understandings of division to divide unit fractions by whole numbers and whole numbers by unit
fractions
    a. Interpret division of a unit fraction by a non-zero whole number, and compute such quotients. For example, create
a story context for (1/3) ÷ 4, and use a visual fraction model to show the quotient. Use the relationship between
multiplication and division to explain that (1/3) ÷ 4 = 1/12 because (1/12) × 4 = 1/3.
    b. Interpret division of a whole number by a unit fraction, and compute such quotients. For example, create a story context
for 4 ÷ (1/5), and use a visual fraction model to show the quotient. Use the relationship between multiplication and
division to explain that 4 ÷ (1/5) = 20 because 20 × (1/5) = 4.
c. Solve real-world problems involving division of unit fractions by non-zero whole numbers and division of whole numbers
by unit fractions, e.g., by using visual fraction models and equations to represent the problem. For example, how much
chocolate will each person get if 3 people share 1/2 lb of chocolate equally? How many 1/3-cup servings are in 2 cups
of raisins?
    },
    Measurement and Data: {
        Convert like measurement units within a given measurement system.
1. Convert among different-sized standard measurement units within a given measurement system (e.g., convert 5 cm to
0.05 m), and use these conversions in solving multi-step, real-world problems.
Represent and interpret data.
2. Make a line plot to display a data set of measurements in fractions of a unit (1/2, 1/4, 1/8). Use operations on fractions
for this grade to solve problems involving information presented in line plots. For example, given different measurements of
liquid in identical beakers, find the amount of liquid each beaker would contain if the total amount in all the beakers were
redistributed equally.
Geometric measurement: understand concepts of volume and relate volume to multiplication and to addition.
3. Recognize volume as an attribute of solid figures and understand concepts of volume measurement.
a. A cube with side length 1 unit, called a “unit cube,” is said to have “one cubic unit” of volume, and can be used to
measure volume.
b. A solid figure which can be packed without gaps or overlaps using n unit cubes is said to have a volume of n cubic units.
4. Measure volumes by counting unit cubes, using cubic cm, cubic in, cubic ft, and improvised units.
5. Relate volume to the operations of multiplication and addition and solve real-world and mathematical problems involving
volume.
a. Find the volume of a right rectangular prism with whole-number side lengths by packing it with unit cubes, and show
that the volume is the same as would be found by multiplying the edge lengths, equivalently by multiplying the height
by the area of the base. Represent threefold whole-number products as volumes, e.g., to represent the associative
property of multiplication.
b. Apply the formulas V = l × w × h and V = b × h for rectangular prisms to find volumes of right rectangular prisms with
whole-number edge lengths in the context of solving real-world and mathematical problems.
c. Recognize volume as additive. Find volumes of solid figures composed of two non-overlapping right rectangular prisms
by adding the volumes of the non-overlapping parts, applying this technique to solve real-world problems.
    },
    Geometry: {
        Graph points on the coordinate plane to solve real-world and mathematical problems.
1. Use a pair of perpendicular number lines, called axes, to define a coordinate system, with the intersection of the lines
(the origin) arranged to coincide with the 0 on each line and a given point in the plane located by using an ordered pair of
numbers, called its coordinates. Understand that the first number indicates how far to travel from the origin in the direction
of one axis, and the second number indicates how far to travel in the direction of the second axis, with the convention that
the names of the two axes and the coordinates correspond (e.g., x-axis and x-coordinate, y-axis and y-coordinate).
2. Represent real-world and mathematical problems by graphing points in the first quadrant of the coordinate plane, and
interpret coordinate values of points in the context of the situation.
Classify two-dimensional figures into categories based on their properties.
3. Understand that attributes belonging to a category of two-dimensional figures also belong to all subcategories of that category. For example, all rectangles have four right angles and squares are rectangles, so all squares have four right angles.
4. Classify two-dimensional figures in a hierarchy based on properties
    }
    


]