History Social Science Content Standards CA 6th grade: [
    World History and Geography: Ancient Civilizations

Students in grade six expand their understanding of history by studying the people and
events that ushered in the dawn of the major Western and non-Western ancient civilizations. Geography is of special significance in the development of the human story.
Continued emphasis is placed on the everyday lives, problems, and accomplishments of
people, their role in developing social, economic, and political structures, as well as in
establishing and spreading ideas that helped transform the world forever. Students
develop higher levels of critical thinking by considering why civilizations developed
where and when they did, why they became dominant, and why they declined. Students analyze the interactions among the various cultures, emphasizing their enduring
contributions and the link, despite time, between the contemporary and ancient worlds.
6.1	 Students describe what is known through archaeological studies of the early
physical and cultural development of humankind from the Paleolithic era to
the agricultural revolution.
1. Describe the hunter-gatherer societies, including the development of tools and the use
of fire.
2. Identify the locations of human communities that populated the major regions of the
world and describe how humans adapted to a variety of environments.
3. Discuss the climatic changes and human modifications of the physical environment
that gave rise to the domestication of plants and animals and new sources of clothing
and shelter.
23
California Department of Education Created May 18, 2000
24 	 GRADE SIX
6.2	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social
structures of the early civilizations of Mesopotamia, Egypt, and Kush.
1. Locate and describe the major river systems and discuss the physical settings that
supported permanent settlement and early civilizations.
2. Trace the development of agricultural techniques that permitted the production of
economic surplus and the emergence of cities as centers of culture and power.
3. Understand the relationship between religion and the social and political order in
Mesopotamia and Egypt.
4. Know the significance of Hammurabi’s Code.
5. Discuss the main features of Egyptian art and architecture.
6. Describe the role of Egyptian trade in the eastern Mediterranean and Nile valley.
7. Understand the significance of Queen Hatshepsut and Ramses the Great.
8. Identify the location of the Kush civilization and describe its political, commercial, and
cultural relations with Egypt.
9. Trace the evolution of language and its written forms.
6.3	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social
structures of the Ancient Hebrews.
1. Describe the origins and significance of Judaism as the first monotheistic religion
based on the concept of one God who sets down moral laws for humanity.
2. Identify the sources of the ethical teachings and central beliefs of Judaism (the Hebrew
Bible, the Commentaries): belief in God, observance of law, practice of the concepts of
righteousness and justice, and importance of study; and describe how the ideas of the
Hebrew traditions are reflected in the moral and ethical traditions of Western civilization.
3. Explain the significance of Abraham, Moses, Naomi, Ruth, David, and Yohanan ben
Zaccai in the development of the Jewish religion.
4. Discuss the locations of the settlements and movements of Hebrew peoples, including
the Exodus and their movement to and from Egypt, and outline the significance of the
Exodus to the Jewish and other people.
5. Discuss how Judaism survived and developed despite the continuing dispersion of
much of the Jewish population from Jerusalem and the rest of Israel after the destruction of the second Temple in A.D. 70.
California Department of Education Created May 18, 2000
GRADE SIX 25
6.4	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social
structures of the early civilizations of Ancient Greece.
1. Discuss the connections between geography and the development of city-states in the
region of the Aegean Sea, including patterns of trade and commerce among Greek
city-states and within the wider Mediterranean region.
2. Trace the transition from tyranny and oligarchy to early democratic forms of government and back to dictatorship in ancient Greece, including the significance of the
invention of the idea of citizenship (e.g., from Pericles’ Funeral Oration).
3. State the key differences between Athenian, or direct, democracy and representative
democracy.
4. Explain the significance of Greek mythology to the everyday life of people in the
region and how Greek literature continues to permeate our literature and language
today, drawing from Greek mythology and epics, such as Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey,
and from Aesop’s Fables.
5. Outline the founding, expansion, and political organization of the Persian Empire.
6. Compare and contrast life in Athens and Sparta, with emphasis on their roles in the
Persian and Peloponnesian Wars.
7. Trace the rise of Alexander the Great and the spread of Greek culture eastward and
into Egypt.
8. Describe the enduring contributions of important Greek figures in the arts and sciences (e.g., Hypatia, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Euclid, Thucydides).
6.5	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social
structures of the early civilizations of India.
1. Locate and describe the major river system and discuss the physical setting that supported the rise of this civilization.
2. Discuss the significance of the Aryan invasions.
3. Explain the major beliefs and practices of Brahmanism in India and how they evolved
into early Hinduism.
4. Outline the social structure of the caste system.
5. Know the life and moral teachings of Buddha and how Buddhism spread in India,
Ceylon, and Central Asia.
6. Describe the growth of the Maurya empire and the political and moral achievements
of the emperor Asoka.
7. Discuss important aesthetic and intellectual traditions (e.g., Sanskrit literature, including the Bhagavad Gita; medicine; metallurgy; and mathematics, including HinduArabic numerals and the zero).
California Department of Education Created May 18, 2000
26 	 GRADE SIX
6.6	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social
structures of the early civilizations of China.
1. Locate and describe the origins of Chinese civilization in the Huang-He Valley during
the Shang Dynasty.
2. Explain the geographic features of China that made governance and the spread of
ideas and goods difficult and served to isolate the country from the rest of the world.
3. Know about the life of Confucius and the fundamental teachings of Confucianism and
Taoism.
4. Identify the political and cultural problems prevalent in the time of Confucius and how
he sought to solve them.
5. List the policies and achievements of the emperor Shi Huangdi in unifying northern
China under the Qin Dynasty.
6. Detail the political contributions of the Han Dynasty to the development of the imperial bureaucratic state and the expansion of the empire.
7. Cite the significance of the trans-Eurasian “silk roads” in the period of the Han Dynasty and Roman Empire and their locations.
8. Describe the diffusion of Buddhism northward to China during the Han Dynasty.
6.7	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social
structures during the development of Rome.
1. Identify the location and describe the rise of the Roman Republic, including the importance of such mythical and historical figures as Aeneas, Romulus and Remus,
Cincinnatus, Julius Caesar, and Cicero.
2. Describe the government of the Roman Republic and its significance (e.g., written
constitution and tripartite government, checks and balances, civic duty).
3. Identify the location of and the political and geographic reasons for the growth of
Roman territories and expansion of the empire, including how the empire fostered
economic growth through the use of currency and trade routes.
4. Discuss the influence of Julius Caesar and Augustus in Rome’s transition from republic
to empire.
5. Trace the migration of Jews around the Mediterranean region and the effects of their
conflict with the Romans, including the Romans’ restrictions on their right to live in
Jerusalem.
6. Note the origins of Christianity in the Jewish Messianic prophecies, the life and teachings of Jesus of Nazareth as described in the New Testament, and the contribution of
St. Paul the Apostle to the definition and spread of Christian beliefs (e.g., belief in the
Trinity, resurrection, salvation).
7. Describe the circumstances that led to the spread of Christianity in Europe and other
Roman territories.
8. Discuss the legacies of Roman art and architecture, technology and science, literature,
language, and law
]