The United States Through Industrialism 8th Grade Third Edition: [
    Chapter 1: {
        In this chapter, you read about the first people to settle in North America. You used a map to
study the adaptations made by Native Americans living in eight cultural regions.
The ancestors of Native Americans migrated to America from Asia across a land bridge
during the last Ice Age. As their descendants traveled east and south, they had to adapt to the
challenges of living in many different environments.
Wherever they settled, Native Americans had a special relationship with the world around
them. They believed they were part of nature, and they treated the environment with respect.
Native Americans were a diverse group who spoke many languages. People living in
different cultural regions developed distinctive ways of life that were suited to their
environment‘s climate and natural resources. Scientists study these ways of life by examining
the artifacts America‘s first people left behind.
Depending on where they lived, Native Americans ate different food, built different kinds of
houses, and clothed themselves in different ways. They also practiced many kinds of crafts,
making such things as jewelry, fine baskets, and animal masks. Native Americans built the first
towns and villages in North America, and they were the continent‘s first farmers.
For thousands of years, these First People had the Americas to themselves. That would
change when Europeans learned of the existence of the American continents. In the next
chapter, you will read about the first explorers and settlers to arrive in America from European
countries.
    }
    Chapter 2: {
        In this chapter, you read about the first European settlements in the ―New World.‖ You used an
illustration to learn about the European exploration and settlement of the Americas.
Europeans called the Americas the ―New World‖ because their discovery came as a surprise
to them. Explorers like Christopher Columbus were actually looking for a westward route to Asia
when they stumbled onto these continents.
European nations competed to claim these new lands and the riches they might contain.
Spain claimed vast territories, including Mexico and the southwestern portion of the future
United States. In their search for gold and other treasures, Spanish conquistadors conquered
the Aztecs of Mexico and the Incas of Peru. The Spanish also brought enslaved Africans to the
Americas to plant and harvest crops. In the American Southwest, Spanish missionaries worked
to convert Native Americans to Christianity.
The French, meanwhile, staked a claim to much of present-day Canada, as well as
Louisiana, the territory west of the Mississippi River. Most French settlers were more interested
in trapping and trading furs than in farming or establishing large settlements.
The English based their claim to North America on John Cabot‘s voyage in 1497. After
several attempts, the English established their first permanent colony at Jamestown in Virginia.
The Dutch established their own foothold in North America by founding the colony of New
Amsterdam. The English, however, drove the Dutch out and renamed the colony New York.
For Native Americans, the arrival of Europeans brought many changes. The newcomers
brought new technology and ideas to the native people. But they also brought deadly diseases
that killed great numbers of the first Americans.
    }
    Chapter 3: {
In this chapter, you read about the settlement of the 13 English colonies in the future United
States. You used a spoke diagram to record important features of eight of these colonies.
Settlers had many reasons to come to America in the 1600s and 1700s. Two important
reasons were freedom of religion and the chance to start a new life. However, even though
colonists treasured freedom for themselves, enslaved Africans were taken to America by force.
The New England, Middle, and Southern Colonies all had distinctive geographies and natural
resources. As a result, different ways of life developed in each of these regions. Colonies also
varied in their form of government. All, however, were democratic to some degree.
In the New England Colonies, religion and geography were key influences. Although Puritans
sometimes disagreed with one another, they hoped to establish model communities based on
their religious faith. New England‘s forests and coastline made lumbering, shipbuilding, and
trade very important to the region‘s economy.
The Middle Colonies were geographically, culturally, and religiously diverse. Catholics,
Quakers, Anglicans, and members of other Protestant faiths all found homes in this region.
In the Southern Colonies, climate and geography encouraged the planting of cash crops and
the development of large plantations. In time, slave labor would become a major part of the
economy of this region.
What was daily life like for the settlers, servants, and slaves who came to America? You‘ll
find out in the next chapter.
    }
    Chapter 4: {
        In this chapter, you read about life in the American colonies during the early 1700s. You used a
journal to organize information about various aspects of colonial life.
The colonists developed an economy based on farming, commerce, and crafts. Farm families
produced most of what they needed for themselves. In the villages and cities, many trades and
crafts developed.
American colonists expected to enjoy all the rights of English citizens, especially the right to
have a voice in their own government. Crimes and punishments were defined by colonial
assemblies. Often, punishments were harsh.
Class differences in the colonies were based mostly on wealth. Most people in lower classes
could hope to move up through hard work. Enslaved African Americans had almost no such
hope. After being brought to America in chains, they faced a life of forced obedience and toil.
Religion was very important to the colonists. The First Great Awakening revived religious
feeling and helped spread the idea that all people are equal.
Except in New England, most colonial children received little education. Instead, they were
expected to contribute to the work of the farm or home. Most colonial families were large. Often
they included many relatives besides the parents and their children.
Much of colonial life was hard work, even preparing food. But colonists found ways to mix
work with play. They also enjoyed sports and games.
For most of the 1700s, the colonists were content to be ruled by English laws. In the next
chapter, however, you‘ll learn how tensions grew between the colonists and the government in
far-off England.
    }
    Chapter 5: {
        In this chapter, you read about tensions between the colonies and Britain between 1763 and
1775. You used the metaphor of a principal and students to describe that relationship. American
colonists had grown used to governing themselves, and they felt strongly about their right to do
so.
The French and Indian War left Britain with huge debts and a much larger empire to govern.
Parliament tried to deal with these challenges by imposing new taxes and passing new laws.
These actions divided many of the colonists into opposing camps. Loyalists urged obedience to
Britain, but Patriots resisted ―taxation without representation‖ through protests, boycotts, and
riots.
In 1774, delegates at the First Continental Congress sent a formal complaint to the king.
Meanwhile, Patriots began forming militias to defend themselves against British troops.
King George III was determined to teach the colonists a lesson. But at Lexington and
Concord, Patriots showed they would rather fight than give up their rights. In the next chapter,
you will see how these clashes triggered an all-out war and the birth of a new nation.
    }
    Chapter 6: {
        In this chapter, you read how the American colonies took the dramatic step of declaring their
independence. You used a visual metaphor to describe the key historic events that led up to the
Declaration of Independence. Soon after the skirmishes at Lexington and Concord, the struggle
with Great Britain turned into all-out war. The Second Continental Congress elected George
Washington as the head of the Continental Army. After the bloody Battle of Bunker Hill,
American troops threatened the city of Boston with heavy guns. The British decided to abandon
the city.
The failure of the Olive Branch Petition, and Thomas Paine‘s eloquent pamphlet, Common
Sense, moved the colonies closer to a declaration of independence. Thomas Jefferson, a
delegate to the Second Continental Congress, was selected to write a draft of the declaration.
On July 4, 1776, the delegates took their lives in their hands by signing the Declaration of
Independence. For the first time in history, a government was being established on the basis of
the natural rights of people and the duty of government to honor those rights.
But independence could not be won with words alone. As you will read in the next chapter,
the colonies now faced the challenge of winning a war against the most powerful nation in the
world.
    }
    Chapter 7: {
        In this chapter, you read how the American colonies won their independence from Great Britain.
You used a visual metaphor to record factors that helped to decide the outcome of the
Revolutionary War.
At the start of the war, the Americans seemed sure to lose the fight with Britain. The poorly
trained and poorly equipped American forces were no match for Britain‘s professional army and
huge navy. But patriotic feeling, help from overseas, and a magnificent commander helped to
overcome British strengths. In addition, fighting a war in far-off America posed major problems
for the British.
Still, the British enjoyed a string of victories in the early part of the war. After the loss of New
York, only Washington‘s leadership kept the Americans going. Then, beginning with the victory
at Saratoga, the tide began to turn. When France and Spain joined in the conflict, the Americans
had the help they needed to outlast the British.
The war‘s climax came when the Americans, with the help of the French, trapped
Cornwallis‘s army at Yorktown. After Cornwallis surrendered, it was only a matter of time until
Britain gave up the fight.
The conflict ended officially with the signing of the Treaty of Paris. In this agreement, Britain
recognized the United States as an independent country.
At great cost in lives and property, Americans had won their freedom. They had also set an
example that inspired people in other countries to dream of winning their own liberty. Now they
faced the task of organizing a government for their new nation.
    }
    Chapter 8: {
        In this chapter, you read about the Constitutional Convention, the historic meeting that replaced
the Articles of Confederation with a new plan of government for the United States. You used an
annotated drawing of the Assembly Room at Independence Hall to organize information about
the convention.
Both the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution that replaced it were attempts to
realize the ideals of the American Revolution and the Declaration of Independence. Americans
wanted a government that would protect their rights to ―life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness.‖ The challenge was to create a government that was strong enough to guarantee
these rights, yet not so strong that it could take them away.
The Articles of Confederation, which were America‘s first attempt at self-government, created
a loose union of states under a weak central government. This government saw the new nation
through the Revolutionary War. It also established a procedure for settling western territories.
But, as Shays‘s Rebellion showed, it was too weak in peacetime to keep order or protect its own
property.
Delegates to the Constitutional Convention quickly agreed to create a new constitution. For
four long months, they argued in secret over a number of issues that often threatened to destroy
the meeting. In the end, the framework they created included a series of compromises.
One of these agreements, the Great Compromise, established how the states were to be
represented in the legislative branch of government. The three-fifths compromise settled how
slaves were to be counted in determining a state‘s population. A third set of compromises
created a single chief executive, to be chosen by the Electoral College.
The labors of the framers were only the beginning. Their new Constitution had to be ratified
by the people through special state conventions. Federalists, who supported the Constitution,
were opposed by Anti-Federalists, who feared the power of the proposed national government.
Now it was up to the people to decide.
    }
    Chapter 9: {
        In this chapter, you used an old parchment document to organize information as you studied
how the Constitution defines the organization and powers of the federal government.
The Constitution created in 1787 is both strong and flexible. As the first words of the
Preamble tell us, its authority comes directly from the people, not the states. Power is divided
among three branches of government. The legislative branch makes the laws, the executive
branch carries out the laws, and the judicial branch makes sure that the actions of the other two
branches agree with the Constitution and federal laws. A system of checks and balances keeps
any branch from gaining too much power. The Constitution also ensures that power is shared
between the states and the national government in a system known as federalism.
For all its strength, the Constitution has been flexible enough to adapt to changing times. The
framers purposely made the process of amending the Constitution difficult. Still, 27 amendments
have been added since it was written. The first 10 amendments, called the Bill of Rights,
guarantee the most cherished rights of American citizens. You will read about these
amendments in the next chapter.
    }
    Chapter 10: {
        In this chapter, you read about the Bill of Rights, the first 10 amendments to the Constitution.
You used a visual metaphor to organize information about the amendments.
The promise of a bill of rights was key to getting the Constitution ratified by the states. As a
member of the first Congress, James Madison proposed the amendments that guarantee the
rights of citizens of the United States.
The First Amendment spells out five basic freedoms enjoyed by all Americans, from freedom
of speech to the right to petition the government. The Second, Third, and Fourth Amendments
specify protections for ordinary citizens against the abuse of government power.
The Fifth through Eighth Amendments are intended to guarantee fair treatment for people
who are involved in legal actions.
The Ninth and Tenth Amendments concern the relationships among the federal government,
the states, and the people.
As with other parts of the Constitution, the Supreme Court has interpreted the provisions of
the Bill of Rights over time and applied them to new situations. But the spirit of these
amendments remains much the same as when James Madison drafted them more than 200
years ago. His ―unnecessary‖ addition to the Constitution has become the foundation of the
rights and liberties Americans have learned to cherish.
    }
    Chapter 11: {
        In this chapter, you read about the beginnings of political parties in the United States. You used
character collages of Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson to learn about the political
differences of the Federalist and Democratic-Republican Parties during the 1790s.
Both Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson served in President Washington‘s cabinet.
Their responses to the Whiskey Rebellion and the French Revolution revealed the sharp
differences between these talented men, and between their supporters.
Hamilton and the Federalists believed in a strong national government run by wealthy and
well-educated men. Hamilton also favored using the national government‘s power to support
business, manufacturing, and trade. Alarmed by the violence of the French Revolution, he and
other Federalists favored Great Britain in its war with France.
In contrast, Jefferson and the Republicans looked to the mass of informed citizens to
safeguard democracy. They championed the rights of states and the interests of farmers and
planters. Republicans saw the French Revolution as a step toward democracy, and they
attacked the Federalists‘ support for Great Britain.
During the presidency of John Adams, Federalists used the Alien and Sedition Acts to attack
the Republicans. In response, Republicans urged states to nullify these laws.
The emergence of political parties revealed a need to change the Constitution. The election
of 1800 resulted in a tie between the Republican candidates for president and vice president. To
prevent such a tie from happening again, the Twelfth Amendment calls for electors to cast
separate ballots for president and vice president.
While the young nation worked to strengthen its political institutions, it also faced threats from
other countries. In the next chapter, you will read about how the United States responded to
these threats.
    }

    Chapter 12: {
        In this chapter, you learned about the birth of foreign policy in the United States. You used a
spectrum to chart the range of U.S. foreign policy from isolationism to involvement.
Our first president, George Washington, knew that the young United States was not prepared
for war. He established a policy of isolationism that stated America would avoid alliances with
other countries. Each president following Washington faced new dilemmas that required
decisions about what was best for America.
During the presidency of John Adams, the dilemma involved French attacks on American
ships. Adams followed Washington‘s policy of isolationism and kept America at peace.
President Thomas Jefferson also faced threats at sea. When peace talks failed, he declared
an embargo on American ports. It, too, was unsuccessful. President James Madison then tried
offering a trade deal to both France and Britain. But the attacks at sea continued. Madison
finally abandoned isolationism and declared war on Britain in 1812. The War of 1812 resulted in
a peace treaty with Britain.
President Monroe‘s dilemma was whether or not to support the new Latin American states.
Monroe issued a policy called the Monroe Doctrine. In it, he warned the nations of Europe to
leave the Americas alone. The Monroe Doctrine established the United States as a strong and
confident nation, willing to stand up for its own freedom and that of others. In the next chapter,
you will learn how the United States developed a stronger national identity in the first half of the
19th century.
    }
    Chapter 13: {
        In this chapter, you read about the growing sense of nationhood in the United States after the
War of 1812. You used an illustration of the American flag to organize information about the art,
music, politics, and literature that helped define the American identity.
People in the United States during this time were extremely proud of their country. Despite
regional differences, it seemed that Americans were building a nation unlike any seen before.
Rulers served the people, rather than the other way around. Men who started with nothing
became wealthy merchants or powerful statesmen. That was what it meant to be American. It
was what made you different from a European.
But was it really true?
Yes, answered Frenchman Alexis de Tocqueville—but it was not the whole truth. African
slaves and Native Americans, he wrote, ―both occupy an equally inferior position in the country
that they inhabit; both experience the effects of tyranny.‖ Still, de Tocqueville was impressed
with the spirit of equality and national pride among white men of different classes.
The growing sense of national identity was reflected both in politics and culture. Congress
and the Supreme Court took action to strengthen the national economy and the power of the
federal government. Distinctly American themes and styles developed in art, music, and
literature.
Yet, beneath the surface, inequalities in wealth and regional differences—especially over
slavery—threatened national unity. How much longer could America remain united? Not long,
concluded de Tocqueville. ―Slavery, in the midst of the democratic freedom and enlightenment
of our age, is not an institution that can endure…. One must expect great misfortunes.‖ Later on
you will learn just how tragically right he was.
    }
    Chapter 14: {
        In this chapter, you read about the presidency of Andrew Jackson. You used character portraits
to evaluate Jackson‘s presidency from the perspective of different groups.
First-time voters, many of them farmers and frontiersmen, flocked to the polls to help elect
Andrew Jackson in 1828. Jackson‘s supporters celebrated his election as a victory for the
―common man‖ over the rich, well-born, and powerful. Jackson, after all, was a self-made man
who rose from poverty to become president of the United States.
As president, Jackson fought a number of battles for ―the people‖—and rewarded his friends
and supporters at the same time. For advice, he relied on his ―kitchen cabinet,‖ rather than the
official cabinet. He replaced a number of Republican civil servants with Democrats. And he
waged war on the powerful Bank of the United States.
A controversy over higher tariffs led to the nullification crisis, in which South Carolinians
threatened to separate from the United States. Although Jackson forced them to back down, the
crisis was an early sign of developing tensions between northern and southern states.
Jackson‘s Indian policy was simple: move the eastern Indians across the Mississippi to make
room for whites. The Indian Removal Act caused great suffering for thousands of Native
Americans. Furthermore, Jackson had only moved the conflict between whites and Indians to
the West, not solved it. For, as you will read in the next chapter, the West was just where many
white Americans were looking for new opportunities and the chance to expand their way of life
across the continent.
(Caption)
Andrew Jackson was America‘s first frontier president. He came to office with great popular
support. His supporters viewed him as a president of the people. His enemies saw him as a
president hoping to become a king
    }
    Chapter 15: {
        In this chapter, you read about how Americans extended their nation to the west and the south.
You used a map of America‘s acquisitions to study how and why the United States expanded
into these territories.
In the 1800s, many Americans believed that they had both the right and the duty (an idea
called Manifest Destiny) to spread their way of life across the continent.
America‘s first great expansion was the Louisiana Purchase. Next, Florida was added to the
United States through a treaty with Spain. A treaty with Great Britain added Oregon Country.
Americans in Texas rebelled against the Mexican government there and created the Lone
Star Republic. Ten years later, the United States annexed Texas.
In 1846, the United States went to war with Mexico and acquired California and New Mexico
as part of the Mexican Cession. Later, the Gadsden Purchase completed the outline of the
contiguous United States.
America‘s expansion across the continent was now complete. Yet much of the West was only
thinly settled. In the next chapter, you will learn about the people who moved into this vast area.
(Caption)
As the 19th century progressed, more and more settlers were lured to the West by hopes of free
land and an independent and prosperous life.
    }

    Chapter 16: {
        In the 1800s, the West became a magnet for people seeking adventure and opportunity. In this
chapter, you learned about the people who settled the West. You used an illustration of a
western town as you studied eight groups of settlers and their contributions to the West.
The Lewis and Clark expedition went west to find the Northwest Passage and to establish
friendly relations with the native peoples. By mapping and collecting information about the West,
the expedition helped prepare the way for future settlement.
In California, Spanish-speaking settlers followed in the footsteps of missionaries. The
Californios‘ way of life centered on the rancho and the raising of cattle.
Valuable beaver furs—and a life of freedom and adventure—attracted fur trappers to the
West. Many of these hardy ―mountain men‖ stayed on as scouts, guides, and traders.
Missionaries traveled to Oregon and other western territories in hopes of converting Indians
to Christianity. Although they made few converts, the missionaries attracted other settlers to the
West.
Many women pioneers sought new opportunities in the West. Besides working to establish
homes and farms, women brought education and culture to new settlements.
Mormon pioneers traveled to Utah in search of religious freedom. The Mormons built cities
and towns, and they introduced new methods of farming to the dry plains.
Gold seekers from all over the world rushed to California in 1849. Few became rich, but
many stayed to help build the economy of the new state.
The gold rush attracted thousands of Chinese immigrants to California. Although they often
had to fight prejudice, most of them remained in the United States, working as laborers and
starting new businesses and farms.
    }
    Chapter 17: {
        In this chapter, you learned about Mexicano contributions to the culture of the Southwest. You
used a matrix to organize your information. Movies and television often portray the settling of
the West as a story of white pioneers taming the wilderness. As you have seen, the story is not
that simple. Long before whites arrived, Mexicanos had learned to survive and even thrive in the
harsh landscape of the Southwest. Although often mistreated by pioneers from the East, their
knowledge would prove to be more valuable than gold to the newcomers.
American settlers learned about mining, cattle ranching, cowboy life, and sheep raising from
Mexicanos. They adopted irrigation techniques that had been pioneered by Mexicanos and by
Pueblo Indians. They learned to appreciate Mexicano food. They borrowed the Mexicanos‘
architectural styles and laws. And they learned to enjoy Mexicano entertainments.
Today, Mexicano culture survives in such American adaptations as the organization of
ranches, Spanish-style homes, popular foods, and legal traditions regarding water and
community property. The American language is enriched by Spanish and Mexican words like
patio, rodeo, and poncho. From San Francisco to San Antonio, hundreds of place names in the
West and Southwest echo the Spanish-Mexican heritage. Millions of Americans celebrate the
Mexican holiday Cinco de Mayo. It is hard to imagine what the United States would be like
without this rich legacy
    }
    Chapter 18: {
        In this chapter, you read about the reform movements that swept through the United States
between about 1820 and 1850. You used an illustration of a protest march to learn about these
reforms.
Many reformers were inspired by the Second Great Awakening, which taught Christians to
perform good works in order to be saved. Others were inspired by transcendentalist writers like
Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau.
Dorothea Dix pioneered the reform of prisons and the treatment of the mentally ill. The
movement to make education freely available to all was led by Horace Mann.
Inspired in part by religious revivalism, abolitionists braved violent opposition as they worked
to end slavery. Women and former slaves played a key role in this movement.
The abolitionist campaign helped spark the struggle for women‘s rights. The organized
movement for women‘s rights began with the Seneca Falls Convention and its Declaration of
Sentiments.
These reform movements had their greatest effect in the North. In the next chapter, you will
learn about the growing differences between the North and the South.
    }
    Chapter 19: {
        In this chapter, you learned how the North and the South developed differently from each other
in the first half of the 1800s. You used spoke diagrams to describe the geography, economy,
transportation, and society of the two sections.
Geography was a principal reason why northerners and southerners developed different
ways of life. In contrast to the variety of trades and businesses in the North, the South
depended primarily on agriculture. Although only a minority of white southerners owned slaves,
much of the South‘s economy depended on slave labor.
In the North, the new inventions of the Industrial Revolution led to the development of mills
and factories. Increasing numbers of people went to work as wage earners. New machines such
as Cyrus McCormick‘s reaper revolutionized agriculture.
Dramatic improvements in transportation made it easier for northerners to travel and to ship
goods over long distances. In the South, however, people continued to travel by river, and rail
lines were fewer.
Southern society was divided into ranks. The wealthy few enjoyed great influence and power.
But even the poorest whites ranked above African Americans, whether free or slave.
The North, too, had its wealthy class. But farmers and laborers alike believed they could
create comfortable lives for their families through hard work.
The different worlds of the North and South led to conflicting viewpoints on many issues,
including internal improvements and trade. But the most divisive issue of all was slavery. In the
next chapter, you will learn what life was like for African Americans, both free and slave, in
1850.
    }
    Chapter 20: {
        In this chapter, you learned what life was like for African Americans during the 19th century. You
looked at a story quilt made by a slave that gave you clues, or messages, about slavery.
African Americans had a great impact on the development of American life. The economy of
the South was built on the labor of African American slaves. Some African Americans lived in
freedom in both the North and South, but nowhere could they escape racism and discrimination.
Those who lived in slavery worked endlessly, either in the fields or as servants in the
master‘s house. Most lived in simple, dirt-floor cabins with only straw and rags for beds. Many
slaves lived in daily fear of harsh punishments. Their biggest fear was the threat of family
members being sold to other farms. Many slaves learned to rebel in small ways. They might
break a tool on purpose or pretend to be lame or blind. Some slaves fought back openly when
the oppression became too much to bear. At great risk, many tried to run away. Some
slaveholders would rather kill runaways than allow them to escape.
Slaves were encouraged to attend church, and Sunday was a day of rest for everyone.
Slaves spent Saturday nights at social events and worshiped in their own secret churches on
Sundays. They prayed and sang spirituals to help themselves find joy and hope in their hard
lives.
In the next chapter, you will read about how different views on slavery in the North and the
South threatened to divide the nation.
    }
    Chapter 21: {
        In this chapter, you learned how a series of compromises failed to keep the United States from
splitting in two over the issue of slavery. You used the metaphor of an unraveling flag to
understand the compromises and decisions that were made in an effort to preserve the Union.
In 1820, the Missouri Compromise resolved the first great crisis over slavery by admitting
Missouri to the Union as a slave state and Maine as a free state. The compromise also drew a
line across the Louisiana Territory. In the future, slavery would be permitted only south of that
line.
The furor over slavery in new territories erupted again after the war with Mexico. The
Compromise of 1850 admitted California as a free state while leaving the territories of New
Mexico and Utah open to slavery. In addition, the compromise ended the slave trade in
Washington, D.C., and included a fugitive slave law.
Once again, compromise failed. Northerners refused to honor the Fugitive Slave Law.
Attitudes on both sides were hardened further by Harriet Beecher Stowe‘s powerful novel Uncle
Tom’s Cabin, the Kansas-Nebraska Act, and the Supreme Court‘s decision on the Dred Scott
case.
In Illinois, the issue of slavery was the focus of well-publicized debates between Abraham
Lincoln and Stephen Douglas. Tempers—and fears—rose even higher after John Brown‘s raid
on Harpers Ferry.
For many southerners, Lincoln‘s election as president in 1860 was the last straw. Led by
South Carolina, several southern states left the Union. When southerners fired on Fort Sumter,
in Charleston Harbor, the time for compromise had passed. The nation was poised on the brink
of war
    }
    Chapter 22: {
        In this chapter, you read about the Civil War between the Union and the Confederacy. You used
an annotated illustration of a soldier‘s haversack to help you understand the events and effects
of the Civil War.
Both sides had advantages and disadvantages going into the war. The North had a larger
population and more factories and railroads than the South, but it lacked strong military
leadership. The South had serious economic problems, but it had capable generals and the
advantage of fighting a defensive war.
New weapons and military tactics allowed soldiers to kill from greater distances. They also
caused horrifying numbers of deaths and casualties. Unfortunately, medical knowledge was not
as advanced as the weapons of war. Many more soldiers died of disease than from wounds.
After the Battle of Antietam, President Lincoln issued his Emancipation Proclamation, freeing
all slaves in the Confederacy. The proclamation helped to make the war a crusade for freedom.
The battle of Gettysburg ended the South‘s last attempt to invade the North. It proved to be a
turning point. Lincoln‘s speech dedicating the cemetery at Gettysburg gave the war a larger
meaning by relating it to the ideals of the American Revolution.
The Union finally won the war under the leadership of General Grant. Grant began waging
total war on the Confederacy. Union soldiers marched through the South, burning fields and
houses and terrifying all those in their path. When the Union army surrounded General Lee‘s 
Confederate troops, Lee was forced to surrender. Grant was generous to the southern troops.
He fed them and sent them home to rebuild their lives.
The Civil War has been compared to a furnace that forged a new country, one in which
secession and slavery had no place. But the costs were enormous, and many issues remained.
In the next chapter, you will read about how the nation tried to become whole again.
    }
    Chapter 23: {
        In this chapter, you read about the events of Reconstruction in the South after the Civil War.
You used a visual metaphor to understand African Americans‘ struggle to achieve full rights as
citizens during the five phases of Reconstruction.
In the first phase, the Thirteenth Amendment became part of the Constitution, and slavery
became illegal. However, freedmen still could not vote and were allowed to work only at
unskilled jobs. African Americans were kept separate from whites in public. Black children could
not attend public schools.
Congressional Reconstruction was an attempt to give African Americans all the rights of
citizens. The Fourteenth Amendment granted full citizenship to all people born in the United
States.
Congress sent federal troops back to the South to begin Southern Reconstruction. The
Fifteenth Amendment guaranteed the right to vote to eligible citizens of all races. Many African
Americans were elected to state government offices during this third phase of Reconstruction.
During the fourth phase of Reconstruction, President Hayes withdrew federal troops from the
South. Throughout the South, the men who had held African Americans in slavery before the
war were again in charge of their lives and livelihoods.
During the final stage of Reconstruction, southern state governments began reversing the
gains that African Americans had made. Education and the right to vote in the South became
luxuries that only white southerners could afford. Jim Crow laws quickly reestablished
segregation.
African Americans were free to leave the South, and many did. They migrated to the North
and the West, or returned to Africa. But most remained in the South, where they formed
communities to help themselves build better lives.
In the next chapter, you will read about the tensions that arose as Americans settled the
West.
    }
    Chapter 24: {
        In this chapter, you read about the tensions that developed between settlers and Native
Americans in the West after the Civil War. You used an illustration of a buffalo hide to record
information about four groups of settlers and their impact on the West‘s native peoples.
As settlers moved west, Native Americans were pushed off their lands and onto reservations.
When Indians like the Nez Percé resisted, soldiers were sent to move them by force.
During the Civil War, the Homestead Act and the Pacific Railway Act aroused new interest in
the West. The completion of the first transcontinental railroad in 1869 opened the West to a
flood of new settlers.
Much of the West was first explored by miners seeking gold and silver. The railroads helped
ranchers and cowboys introduce large-scale cattle ranching to the Great Plains. Homesteaders
turned the Great Plains into the most productive wheat-producing region in the world.
The wars between settlers, soldiers, and Plains Indians came to a head in the Battle of the
Little Big Horn. The Indians won the battle, but soon afterward the Sioux and Cheyenne were
forced onto reservations.
The settling of the West helped to make the United States one of the world‘s largest and
wealthiest countries. In the next chapter, you will learn how the rise of big business created new
opportunities and problems for workers, immigrants, and politicians from east to west.
    }
    Chapter 25: {
        In this chapter, you read about the rapid industrialization of the United States and how this
progress influenced the way average people earned their livings. You also read a detailed
account of an infamous event in history—the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire. You used an
illustration to learn about the expansion of industry and the effects of this expansion on workers.
New inventions and ideas made it possible for businesses to grow in size and efficiency.
While these innovations allowed more Americans to afford manufactured items, there was a
hidden price to pay. With the rise of big business through corporations, trusts, and monopolies,
the wealthy got wealthier and the poor got poorer.
As cities grew, factories rose ten or more stories above the ground, and people from all over
came looking for jobs. People lived in crowded, unclean, and dangerous tenement buildings.
Men, women, and children worked long hours for low wages in crowded, unsafe factories. Doors 
were kept locked, and workers could not leave their stations without permission. Most worked in
miserable conditions.
Workers didn‘t dare speak up for fear of losing their jobs. By joining trade unions, they could
fight as a group for better wages and working conditions. When organized workers went on
strike, factory owners often responded with violence or by simply hiring other workers.
Unfortunately, it took the horrors of the Triangle Factory fire to make the dangers of factory life
real to the American public.
In the next chapter, you will read about the many immigrants who worked in these factories
and how they viewed their lives in America.
    }
    Chapter 26: {
        In this chapter, you read about the great wave of immigration to the United States between 1880
and 1920. You used an illustration to learn about the experiences of four immigrant groups from
around the world who built new lives in America.
The immigrants of this period were far more diverse than earlier arrivals. Many were
escaping from poverty, wars, or persecution. Others were drawn to America by the promise of
economic opportunity. With their skills and labor, these new immigrants helped build the nation‘s
booming cities and industries. But they also faced many challenges, including the tension
between assimilation and preserving their way of life.
Each group of immigrants faced its own challenges in journeying to America. Once they
arrived, most had to pass inspection at immigration stations like those on Ellis Island in New
York Harbor and Angel Island in San Francisco Bay. There they could be denied entry and sent
home.
The immigrants who did enter the country often experienced prejudice and discrimination. In
cities, they crowded into their own neighborhoods and worked at lower-paying jobs. In the West
and the Southwest, Mexican farmworkers labored long hours in the fields and followed the crops
from region to region.
In the 1920s, anti-immigrant feeling led Congress to limit the number of people who would be
allowed into the United States. These immigration-restriction laws brought an end to the great
wave of immigration. But by then, the United States had become a far more diverse country.
Only time would tell whether Americans would embrace this diversity and extend the promise of
equal opportunity to all the nation‘s people.
    }
    Chapter 27: {
        In this chapter, you learned about the Progressive movement of the early 20th century. You
used a panel of historical figures to help understand the views and work of social leaders during
this time.
As early as the 1870s, farmers had organized in protest against government‘s laissez-faire
policies and the growing power of big business. The Granger and Populist movements
championed the cause of the ―common man.‖ Their ideas helped sow the seeds of Progressive
reform.
To men of industry like Rockefeller and Carnegie, calls for reform were misguided. All of
America, they argued, had benefited from industrialization. They saw a country that was
growing in wealth. Ordinary Americans enjoyed luxuries that were unheard of just a short time
before.
Progressives agreed that many industrial advances were good for the country. But they also
saw continuing problems in American society. They used newspapers, magazines, and books to
draw attention to such issues as child labor, fair business practices, conservation, and equal
rights. Government regulation, they said, was needed to soften the negative effects of the
industrial age.
Progressives fought for many different causes, such as the rights of workers, women, African
Americans, and consumers. Their efforts convinced many people that government had a role to
play in correcting social problems.
The work of Progressives gave hope for a better future for millions of Americans. In the next
chapter, you will read about how America‘s successes helped the country to become a powerful
world leader.
    }
    Chapter 28: {
        In this chapter, you read about American expansionism and the nation‘s involvement in World
War I. You used a front-page headline to summarize key information about U.S. foreign policy
from the late 1800s to 1920.
America‘s first great expansion after the Civil War was the purchase of Alaska. The United
States also expanded westward by taking over the Midway Islands in the Pacific and annexing
Hawaii.
As a result of the Spanish-American War, the United States gained two new possessions—
Puerto Rico and the Philippines. Although the United States did not take over Cuba, it did keep
the right to send troops to the island and to maintain naval bases there.
In Central America, the United States encouraged revolution in Panama, and then purchased
a strip of land from the new country in order to build the Panama Canal. The United States
maintained its control over the Canal Zone for the rest of the 20th century.
By the time World War I broke out, the United States was becoming a world power. America
remained neutral until late in the war, and then entered the conflict on the side of the Allied
Powers. President Wilson described the war as a fight to make the world safe for democracy.
Americans helped to win the war, but Wilson was unable to get all of his peace plan adopted.
The U.S. Senate refused to ratify the peace treaty, preventing the United States from joining the
League of Nations. In Europe, the harsh terms imposed by the victorious Allies caused great
bitterness in Germany.
Meanwhile, the United States turned back toward isolationism. After World War II, however,
America would remain engaged in world affairs.
Other big changes were also in store for Americans. In the final chapter of this book, you will
explore some of these changes.
    }
    Chapter 29: {
        In this chapter, you learned about some of the major changes in American life since 1914. You
used a timeline as you made links between 20th century events and those of earlier times.
A major issue in the 20th century was the continuing struggle for equality. Several groups
made important progress. Women won the right to vote. African Americans led the fight for civil
rights and against segregation and discrimination. Religious minorities won greater acceptance.
Yet inequalities remain an issue today.
More than ever before, education became a key to advancing in American society. Today‘s
economy requires educated, skilled workers. Students who lack high school diplomas enjoy
much less success than high school and college graduates.
The economy continues to change because of innovation and new technology. In recent
decades, the computer revolution has reshaped American life both at work and at home.
Despite economic progress, however, millions of people continue to live in poverty. African
Americans, Hispanics, and immigrants are more likely to be poor than white Americans.
Since 1914, court decisions and constitutional amendments have broadened the protection
of individual rights. The Supreme Court ended segregation in public schools and guaranteed the 
right of all accused persons to a lawyer. Constitutional amendments ended poll taxes and gave
18-year-olds the right to vote. These changes help meet the national promise of liberty and
justice for all.
Individual Americans also worked for a more just society. The Little Rock Nine, Betty Friedan,
César Chávez, and Ryan White all took action to make life better for Americans. They showed
that ordinary people can make a big difference.
In this book you have learned about many individuals who have helped to nurture the
American dream of freedom and equality. That dream connects all of us living today with those
who have come before us. Some day, Americans will write the history of our own time. W
    }
]