NGSS CA Grades 9-12 Earth and Space Science: [
    HS-ESS1 Earth’s Place in the Universe: {
        Core Ideas: [
            ESS1.A: The Universe and Its Stars
            - The star called the sun is changing and will burn out
            over a lifespan of approximately 10 billion years.
            (HS-ESS1-1)
            - The study of stars’ light spectra and brightness is
            used to identify compositional elements of stars,
            their movements, and their distances from Earth.
            (HS-ESS1-2), (HS-ESS1-3)
            - The Big Bang theory is supported by observations
            of distant galaxies receding from our own, of the
            measured composition of stars and non-stellar
            gases, and of the maps of spectra of the primordial
            radiation (cosmic microwave background) that still
            fills the universe. (HS-ESS1-2)
            - Other than the hydrogen and helium formed at the
            time of the Big Bang, nuclear fusion within stars
            produces all atomic nuclei lighter than and including iron, and the process releases electromagnetic
            energy. Heavier elements are produced when certain
            massive stars achieve a supernova stage and explode. (HS-ESS1-2), (HS-ESS1-3)
            ESS1.B: Earth and the Solar System
            - Kepler’s laws describe common features of the
            motions of orbiting objects, including their elliptical
            paths around the sun. Orbits may change due to the
            gravitational effects from, or collisions with, other
            objects in the solar system. (HS-ESS1-4)
            ESS1.C: The History of Planet Earth
            - Continental rocks, which can be older than 4 billion
            years, are generally much older than the rocks of the
            ocean floor, which are less than 200 million years
            old. (HS-ESS1-5)
            - Although active geologic processes, such as plate
            tectonics and erosion, have destroyed or altered
            most of the very early rock record on Earth, other
            objects in the solar system, such as lunar rocks,
            asteroids, and meteorites, have changed little over
            billions of years. Studying these objects can provide
            information about Earth’s formation and early history. (HS-ESS1-6)
            ESS2.B: Plate Tectonics and Large-Scale System
            Interactions
            - Plate tectonics is the unifying theory that explains
            the past and current movements of the rocks at
            Earth’s surface and provides a framework for understanding its geologic history. (ESS2.B Grade 8 GBE),
            (secondary to HS-ESS1-5)
            PS1.C: Nuclear Processes
            - Spontaneous radioactive decays follow a characteristic exponential decay law. Nuclear lifetimes allow
            radiometric dating to be used to determine the ages
            of rocks and other materials. (secondary to HSESS1-5), (secondary to HS-ESS1-6)
            PS3.D: Energy in Chemical Processes and Everyday
            Life
            - Nuclear Fusion processes in the center of the sun
            release the energy that ultimately reaches Earth as
            radiation. (secondary to HS-ESS1-1)
            PS4.B Electromagnetic Radiation
            - Atoms of each element emit and absorb characteristic frequencies of light. These characteristics allow
            identification of the presence of an element, even in
            microscopic quantities. (secondary to HS-ESS1-2)
        ]
    },
    HS-ESS2 Earth’s Systems: {
        Core Ideas: [
            ESS1.B: Earth and the Solar System
            - Cyclical changes in the shape of Earth’s orbit around
            the sun, together with changes in the tilt of the planet’s axis of rotation, both occurring over hundreds of
            thousands of years, have altered the intensity and
            distribution of sunlight falling on the earth. These
            phenomena cause a cycle of ice ages and other
            gradual climate changes. (secondary to HS-ESS2-4)
            - Earth’s systems, being dynamic and interacting,
            cause feedback effects that can increase or decrease the original changes. (HS-ESS2-1), (HSESS2-2)
            - Evidence from deep probes and seismic waves, reconstructions of historical changes in Earth’s surface
            and its magnetic field, and an understanding of
            physical and chemical processes lead to a model of
            Earth with a hot but solid inner core, a liquid outer
            core, a solid mantle and crust. Motions of the mantle and its plates occur primarily through thermal
            convection, which involves the cycling of matter due
            to the outward flow of energy from Earth’s interior
            and gravitational movement of denser materials
            toward the interior. (HS-ESS2-3)
            - The geological record shows that changes to global
            and regional climate can be caused by interactions
            among changes in the sun’s energy output or Earth’s
            orbit, tectonic events, ocean circulation, volcanic
            activity, glaciers, vegetation, and human activities.
            These changes can occur on a variety of time scales
            from sudden (e.g., volcanic ash clouds) to intermediate (ice ages) to very long-term tectonic cycles.
            (HS-ESS2-4)
            ESS2.B: Plate Tectonics and Large-Scale System
            Interactions
            - The radioactive decay of unstable isotopes continually generates new energy within Earth’s crust
            and mantle, providing the primary source of the
            heat that drives mantle convection. Plate tectonics
            can be viewed as the surface expression of mantle
            convection. (HS-ESS2-3)
            - Plate tectonics is the unifying theory that explains
            the past and current movements of the rocks at
            Earth’s surface and provides a framework for understanding its geologic history. Plate movements are
            responsible for most continental and ocean-floor
            features and for the distribution of most rocks and
            minerals within Earth’s crust. (ESS2.B Grade 8 GBE)
            (HS-ESS2-1)
            ESS2.C: The Roles of Water in Earth’s Surface
            Processes
            - The abundance of liquid water on Earth’s surface
            and its unique combination of physical and chemical properties are central to the planet’s dynamics.These properties include water’s exceptional
            capacity to absorb, store, and release large amounts
            of energy, transmit sunlight, expand upon freezing,
            dissolve and transport materials, and lower the viscosities and melting points of rocks. (HS-ESS2-5)
            ESS2.D: Weather and Climate
            - The foundation for Earth’s global climate systems is
            the electromagnetic radiation from the sun, as well
            as its reflection, absorption, storage, and redistribution among the atmosphere, ocean, and land
            systems, and this energy’s re-radiation into space.
            (HS-ESS2-2), (HS-ESS2-4)

            -
            - Changes in the atmosphere due to human activity
            have increased carbon dioxide concentrations and
            thus affect climate. (HS-ESS2-6), (HS-ESS2-4)
            ESS2.E: Biogeology
            - The many dynamic and delicate feedbacks between
            the biosphere and other Earth systems cause a
            continual co-evolution of Earth’s surface and the life
            that exists on it. (HS-ESS2-7)
            PS4.A: Wave Properties
            - Geologists use seismic waves and their reflection at
            interfaces between layers to probe structures deep
            in the planet. (secondary to HS-ESS2-3)
        ]
    }
    HS-ESS3 Earth and Human Activity: {
        Core Ideas: [
            ESS2.D: Weather and Climate
            - Current models predict that, although future regional
            climate changes will be complex and varied, average
            global temperatures will continue to rise. The outcomes predicted by global climate models strongly
            depend on the amounts of human-generated greenhouse gases added to the atmosphere each year and
            by the ways in which these gases are absorbed by the
            ocean and biosphere. (secondary to HS-ESS3-6)
            ESS3.A: Natural Resources
            - Resource availability has guided the development of
            human society. (HS-ESS3-1)
            - All forms of energy production and other resource
            extraction have associated economic, social, environmental, and geopolitical costs and risks as well as
            benefits. New technologies and social regulations can
            change the balance of these factors. (HS-ESS3-2)
            ESS3.B: Natural Hazards
            - Natural hazards and other geologic events have
            shaped the course of human history; [they] have
            significantly altered the sizes of human populations
            and have driven human migrations. (HS-ESS3-1)
            ESS3.C: Human Impacts on Earth Systems
            - The sustainability of human societies and the
            biodiversity that supports them requires responsible
            management of natural resources. (HS-ESS3-3)
            - Scientists and engineers can make major contributions by developing technologies that produce less
            pollution and waste and that preclude ecosystem
            degradation. (HS-ESS3-4)
            ESS3.D: Global Climate Change
            - Though the magnitudes of human impacts are
            greater than they have ever been, so too are human
            abilities to model, predict, and manage current and
            future impacts. (HS-ESS3-5)
            - Through computer simulations and other studies,
            important discoveries are still being made about
            how the ocean, the atmosphere, and the biosphere
            interact and are modified in response to human
            activities. (HS-ESS3-6)
            ETS1.B: Developing Possible Solutions
            - When evaluating solutions, it is important to take
            into account a range of constraints, including cost,
            safety, reliability, and aesthetics, and to consider
            social, cultural, and environmental impacts. (secondary to HS-ESS3-2), (secondary to HS-ESS3-4)
        ]
    }

]

