NGSS 5th Grade Science Standards: [
    Structure and Properties of Matter: {
        Core Ideas: [
            PS1.A: Structure and Properties of Matter
            Matter of any type can be subdivided into particles that are too small to see, but even then the matter still exists and can be detected by other means. A model showing that gases are made from matter particles that are too small to see and are moving freely around in space can explain many observations, including the inflation and shape of a balloon and the effects of air on larger particles or objects. (5-PS1-1)
            The amount (weight) of matter is conserved when it changes form, even in transitions in which it seems to vanish. (5-PS1-2)
            Measurements of a variety of properties can be used to identify materials. (Boundary: At this grade level, mass and weight are not distinguished, and no attempt is made to define the unseen particles or explain the atomic-scale mechanism of evaporation and condensation.) (5-PS1-3)
            PS1.B: Chemical Reactions
            When two or more different substances are mixed, a new substance with different properties may be formed. (5-PS1-4)
            No matter what reaction or change in properties occurs, the total weight of the substances does not change. (Boundary: Mass and weight are not distinguished at this grade level.) (5-PS1-2)
        ]
    }
    Matter and Energy in Organisms and Ecosystems: {
        Core Ideas: [
            PS3.D: Energy in Chemical Processes and Everyday Life
            The energy released [from] food was once energy from the sun that was captured by plants in the chemical process that forms plant matter (from air and water). (5-PS3-1)
            LS1.C: Organization for Matter and Energy Flow in Organisms
            Food provides animals with the materials they need for body repair and growth and the energy they need to maintain body warmth and for motion. (secondary to 5-PS3-1)
            Plants acquire their material for growth chiefly from air and water. (5-LS1-1)
            LS2.A: Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
            The food of almost any kind of animal can be traced back to plants. Organisms are related in food webs in which some animals eat plants for food and other animals eat the animals that eat plants. Some organisms, such as fungi and bacteria, break down dead organisms (both plants or plants parts and animals) and therefore operate as “decomposers.” Decomposition eventually restores (recycles) some materials back to the soil. Organisms can survive only in environments in which their particular needs are met. A healthy ecosystem is one in which multiple species of different types are each able to meet their needs in a relatively stable web of life. Newly introduced species can damage the balance of an ecosystem. (5-LS2-1)
            LS2.B: Cycles of Matter and Energy Transfer in Ecosystems
            Matter cycles between the air and soil and among plants, animals, and microbes as these organisms live and die. Organisms obtain gases, and water, from the environment, and release waste matter (gas, liquid, or solid) back into the environment. (5-LS2-1)
        ]
    }
    Earth’s Systems: {
        Core Ideas: [
            ESS2.A: Earth Materials and Systems
            Earth’s major systems are the geosphere (solid and molten rock, soil, and sediments), the hydrosphere (water and ice), the 
            atmosphere (air), and the biosphere (living things, including humans). These systems interact in multiple ways to affect
             Earth’s surface materials and processes. The ocean supports a variety of ecosystems and organisms, shapes landforms, and
              influences climate. Winds and clouds in the atmosphere interact with the landforms to determine patterns of weather. (5-ESS2-1)
            ESS2.C: The Roles of Water in Earth’s Surface Processes
            Nearly all of Earth’s available water is in the ocean. Most fresh water is in glaciers or underground; only a tiny fraction 
            is in streams, lakes, wetlands, and the atmosphere. (5-ESS2-2)
            ESS3.C: Human Impacts on Earth Systems
            Human activities in agriculture, industry, and everyday life have had major effects on the land, vegetation, streams, ocean, 
            air, and even outer space. But individuals and communities are doing things to help protect Earth’s resources and environments. (5-ESS3-1)
        ]
    }
    Space Systems: Stars and the Solar System: {
        Core Ideas: [
            PS2.B: Types of Interactions
            The gravitational force of Earth acting on an object near Earth’s surface pulls that object toward the planet’s center. (5- PS2-1)
            ESS1.A: The Universe and its Stars
            The sun is a star that appears larger and brighter than other stars because it is closer. Stars range greatly in their distance from Earth. (5-ESS1-1)
            ESS1.B: Earth and the Solar System
            The orbits of Earth around the sun and of the moon around Earth, together with the rotation of Earth about an axis between its North and South poles, 
            cause observable patterns. These include day and night; daily changes in the length and direction of shadows; and different 
            positions of the sun, moon, and stars at different times of the day, month, and year. (5-ESS1-2)
        ]
    }
]