NGSS CA Grades 9-12 Physical Science: [
    HS-PS1 Matter and Its Interactions: {
        Core Ideas: [
            PS1.A: Structure and Properties of Matter
            - Each atom has a charged substructure consisting of
            a nucleus, which is made of protons and neutrons,
            surrounded by electrons. (HS-PS1-1)
            - The periodic table orders elements horizontally by the
            number of protons in the atom’s nucleus and places
            those with similar chemical properties in columns.
            The repeating patterns of this table reflect patterns of
            outer electron states. (HS-PS1-1), (HS-PS1-2)
            - The structure and interactions of matter at the bulk
            scale are determined by electrical forces within and
            between atoms. (HS-PS1-3), (secondary to HSPS2-6)
            - Stable forms of matter are those in which the electric
            and magnetic field energy is minimized. A stable
            molecule has less energy than the same set of atoms
            separated; one must provide at least this energy in
            order to take the molecule apart. (HS-PS1-4)
            PS1.B: Chemical Reactions
            - Chemical processes, their rates, and whether or
            not energy is stored or released can be understood
            in terms of the collisions of molecules and the
            rearrangements of atoms into new molecules, with
            consequent changes in the sum of all bond energies
            in the set of molecules that are matched by changes
            in kinetic energy. (HS-PS1-4), (HS-PS1-5)
            - In many situations, a dynamic and condition-dependent balance between a reaction and the reverse
            reaction determines the numbers of all types of
            molecules present. (HS-PS1-6)
            - The fact that atoms are conserved, together with
            knowledge of the chemical properties of the elements involved, can be used to describe and predict
            chemical reactions. (HS-PS1-2), (HS-PS1-7)
            PS1.C: Nuclear Processes
            - Nuclear processes, including fusion, fission, and radioactive decays of unstable nuclei, involve release
            or absorption of energy. The total number of neutrons plus protons does not change in any nuclear
            process. (HS-PS1-8)
            PS2.B: Types of Interactions
            - Attraction and repulsion between electric charges
            at the atomic scale explain the structure, properties, and transformations of matter, as well as the
            contact forces between material objects. (secondary
            to HS-PS1-1),(secondary to HS-PS1-3)
            ETS1.C: Optimizing the Design Solution
            - Criteria may need to be broken down into simpler
            ones that can be approached systematically, and
            decisions about the priority of certain criteria over
            others (trade-offs) may be needed. (secondary to
            HS-PS1-6)
        ]
    }
    HS-PS2 Motion and Stability: Forces and Interactions: {
        Core Ideas: [
            PS1.A: Structure and Properties of Matter
            - The structure and interactions of matter at the bulk
            scale are determined by electrical forces within and
            between atoms. (secondary to HS-PS2-6)
            PS2.A: Forces and Motion
            - Newton’s second law accurately predicts changes in
            the motion of macroscopic objects. (HS-PS2-1)
            - Momentum is defined for a particular frame of reference; it is the mass times the velocity of the object.
            In any system, total momentum is always conserved.
            (HS-PS2-2)
            - If a system interacts with objects outside itself, the
            total momentum of the system can change; however,
            any such change is balanced by changes in the momentum of objects outside the system. (HS-PS2-2),
            (HS-PS2-3)
            PS2.B: Types of Interactions
            - Newton’s law of universal gravitation and Coulomb’s
            law provide the mathematical models to describe
            and predict the effects of gravitational and electrostatic forces between distant objects. (HS-PS2-4)
            - Forces at a distance are explained by fields (gravitational, electric, and magnetic) permeating space
            that can transfer energy through space. Magnets
            or electric currents cause magnetic fields; electric
            charges or changing magnetic fields cause electric
            fields. (HS-PS2-4), (HS-PS2-5)
            - Attraction and repulsion between electric charges at
            the atomic scale explain the structure, properties,
            and transformations of matter, as well as the contact forces between material objects. (HS-PS2-6),
            (secondary to HS-PS1-1), (secondary to HS-PS1-3)
            PS3.A: Definitions of Energy
            - “Electrical energy” may mean energy stored in a
            battery or energy transmitted by electric currents.
            (secondary to HS-PS2-5)
            ETS1.A: Defining and Delimiting Engineering Problems
            - Criteria and constraints also include satisfying any
            requirements set by society, such as taking issues
            of risk mitigation into account, and they should
            be quantified to the extent possible and stated in
            such a way that one can tell if a given design meets
            them. (secondary to HS-PS2-3)
            ETS1.C: Optimizing the Design Solution
            - Criteria may need to be broken down into simpler
            ones that can be approached systematically, and
            decisions about the priority of certain criteria over
            others (trade-offs) may be needed. (secondary to
            HS-PS2-3)
        ]
    }
    HS-PS3 Energy: {
        Core Ideas: [
            PS3.A: Definitions of Energy
            - Energy is a quantitative property of a system that
            depends on the motion and interactions of matter
            and radiation within that system. That there is a
            single quantity called energy is due to the fact that
            a system’s total energy is conserved, even as, within
            the system, energy is continually transferred from
            one object to another and between its various possible forms. (HS-PS3-1), (HS-PS3-2)
            - At the macroscopic scale, energy manifests itself in
            multiple ways, such as in motion, sound, light, and
            thermal energy. (HS-PS3-2), (HS-PS3-3)
            - These relationships are better understood at the
            microscopic scale, at which all of the different
            manifestations of energy can be modeled as a
            combination of energy associated with the motion
            of particles and energy associated with the configuration (relative position of the particles). In some
            cases the relative position energy can be thought
            of as stored in fields (which mediate interactions
            between particles). This last concept includes radiation, a phenomenon in which energy stored in fields
            moves across space. (HS-PS3-2)
            PS3.B: Conservation of Energy and Energy Transfer
            - Conservation of energy means that the total change
            of energy in any system is always equal to the total
            energy transferred into or out of the system. (HSPS3-1)
            - Energy cannot be created or destroyed, but it can be
            transported from one place to another and transferred between systems. (HS-PS3-1), (HS-PS3-4)
            - Mathematical expressions, which quantify how the
            stored energy in a system depends on its configuration (e.g., relative positions of charged particles,
            compression of a spring) and how kinetic energy
            depends on mass and speed, allow the concept of
            conservation of energy to be used to predict and
            describe system behavior. (HS-PS3-1)
            - The availability of energy limits what can occur in
            any system. (HS-PS3-1)
            - Uncontrolled systems always evolve toward more
            stable states—that is, toward more uniform energy
            distribution (e.g., water flows downhill, objects hotter
            than their surrounding environment cool down).
            (HS-PS3-4)
            PS3.C: Relationship Between Energy and Forces
            - When two objects interacting through a field change
            relative position, the energy stored in the field is
            changed. (HS-PS3–5)
            PS3.D: Energy in Chemical Processes
            - Although energy cannot be destroyed, it can be converted to less useful forms—for example, to thermal
            energy in the surrounding environment. (HS-PS3-3),
            (HS-PS3-4)
            ETS1.A: Defining and Delimiting Engineering Problems
            - Criteria and constraints also include satisfying any
            requirements set by society, such as taking issues
            of risk mitigation into account, and they should
            be quantified to the extent possible and stated in
            such a way that one can tell if a given design meets
            them. (secondary to HS-PS3-3)
        ]
    }
    HS-PS4 Waves and Their Applications in Technologies for Information Transfer: {
        Core Ideas: [
            PS3.D: Energy in Chemical Processes
            - Solar cells are human-made devices that likewise
            capture the sun’s energy and produce electrical
            energy. (secondary to HS-PS4-5)
            PS4.A: Wave Properties
            - The wavelength and frequency of a wave are related
            to one another by the speed of travel of the wave,
            which depends on the type of wave and the medium
            through which it is passing. (HS-PS4-1)
            - Information can be digitized (e.g., a picture stored
            as the values of an array of pixels); in this form, it
            can be stored reliably in computer memory and sent
            over long distances as a series of wave pulses. (HSPS4-2), (HS-PS4-5)
            - [From the 3–5 grade band endpoints] Waves can
            add or cancel one another as they cross, depending on their relative phase (i.e., relative position of
            peaks and troughs of the waves), but they emerge
            unaffected by each other. (Boundary: The discussion at this grade level is qualitative only; it can be
            based on the fact that two different sounds can
            pass a location in different directions without getting
            mixed up.) (HS-PS4-3)
            PS4.B: Electromagnetic Radiation
            - Electromagnetic radiation (e.g., radio, microwaves,
            light) can be modeled as a wave of changing
            electric and magnetic fields or as particles called
            photons.The wave model is useful for explaining
            many features of electromagnetic radiation, and the
            particle model explains other features. (HS-PS4-3)
            - When light or longer wavelength electromagnetic radiation is absorbed in matter, it is generally converted into thermal energy (heat). Shorter wavelength
            electromagnetic radiation (ultraviolet, X-rays, gamma
            rays) can ionize atoms and cause damage to living
            cells. (HS-PS4-4)
            - Photovoltaic materials emit electrons when they
            absorb light of a high-enough frequency. (HS-PS4-5)
            PS4.C: Information Technologies and Instrumentation
            - Multiple technologies based on the understanding
            of waves and their interactions with matter are part
            of everyday experiences in the modern world (e.g.,
            medical imaging, communications, scanners) and in
            scientific research. They are essential tools for producing, transmitting, and capturing signals and for
            storing and interpreting the information contained in
            them. (HS-PS4-5)
        ]
    }
]