NGSS CA Grades 9-12 Life Science: [
    HS-LS1 From Molecules to Organisms: Structures and Processes: {
        Core Ideas: [
            LS1.A: Structure and Function
            - Systems of specialized cells within organisms help
            them perform the essential functions of life. (HSLS1-1)
            - All cells contain genetic information in the form of
            DNA molecules. Genes are regions in the DNA that
            contain the instructions that code for the formation
            of proteins, which carry out most of the work of
            cells. (HS-LS1-1) (Note: This Disciplinary Core Idea
            is also addressed by HS-LS3-1.)
            - Multicellular organisms have a hierarchical structural
            organization, in which any one system is made up
            of numerous parts and is itself a component of the
            next level. (HS-LS1-2)
            - Feedback mechanisms maintain a living system’s
            internal conditions within certain limits and mediate
            behaviors, allowing it to remain alive and functional
            even as external conditions change within some
            range. Feedback mechanisms can encourage
            (through positive feedback) or discourage (negative
            feedback) what is going on inside the living system.
            (HS-LS1-3)
            LS1.B: Growth and Development of Organisms
            - In multicellular organisms individual cells grow and
            then divide via a process called mitosis, thereby allowing the organism to grow. The organism begins as
            a single cell (fertilized egg) that divides successively
            to produce many cells, with each parent cell passing
            identical genetic material (two variants of each
            chromosome pair) to both daughter cells. Cellular
            division and differentiation produce and maintain a
            complex organism, composed of systems of tissues
            and organs that work together to meet the needs of
            the whole organism. (HS-LS1-4)
            LS1.C: Organization for Matter and Energy Flow in
            Organisms
            - The process of photosynthesis converts light energy
            to stored chemical energy by converting carbon
            dioxide plus water into sugars plus released oxygen.
            (HS-LS1-5)
            - The sugar molecules thus formed contain carbon,
            hydrogen, and oxygen: their hydrocarbon backbones
            are used to make amino acids and other carbon-based molecules that can be assembled into
            larger molecules (such as proteins or DNA), used for
            example to form new cells. (HS-LS1-6)
            - As matter and energy flow through different organizational levels of living systems, chemical elements
            are recombined in different ways to form different
            products. (HS-LS1-6), (HS-LS1-7)
            - As a result of these chemical reactions, energy is
            transferred from one system of interacting molecules to another. Cellular respiration is a chemical
            process in which the bonds of food molecules and
            oxygen molecules are broken and new compounds
            are formed that can transport energy to muscles.
            Cellular respiration also releases the energy needed
            to maintain body temperature despite ongoing
            energy transfer to the surrounding environment.
            (HS-LS1-7)

        ]
    }
    HS-LS2 Ecosystems: Interactions, Energy, and Dynamics: {
        Core Ideas: [
            LS2.A: Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
            - Ecosystems have carrying capacities, which are
            limits to the numbers of organisms and populations
            they can support. These limits result from such
            factors as the availability of living and nonliving
            resources and from such challenges such as predation, competition, and disease. Organisms would
            have the capacity to produce populations of great
            size were it not for the fact that environments and
            resources are finite. This fundamental tension affects
            the abundance (number of individuals) of species in
            any given ecosystem. (HS-LS2-1), (HS-LS2-2)
            LS2.B: Cycles of Matter and Energy Transfer in
            Ecosystems
            - Photosynthesis and cellular respiration (including
            anaerobic processes) provide most of the energy for
            life processes. (HS-LS2-3)
            - Plants or algae form the lowest level of the food
            web. At each link upward in a food web, only a small
            fraction of the matter consumed at the lower level is
            transferred upward, to produce growth and release
            energy in cellular respiration at the higher level.
            Given this inefficiency, there are generally fewer organisms at higher levels of a food web. Some matter
            reacts to release energy for life functions, some
            matter is stored in newly made structures, and much
            is discarded. The chemical elements that make up
            the molecules of organisms pass through
            food webs and into and out of the atmosphere and
            soil, and they are combined and recombined in
            different ways. At each link in an ecosystem, matter
            and energy are conserved. (HS-LS2-4)
            - Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are important components of the carbon cycle, in which
            carbon is exchanged among the biosphere, atmosphere, oceans, and geosphere through chemical,
            physical, geological, and biological processes.
            (HS-LS2-5)
            LS2.C: Ecosystem Dynamics, Functioning, and
            Resilience
            - A complex set of interactions within an ecosystem
            can keep its numbers and types of organisms
            relatively constant over long periods of time under
            stable conditions. If a modest biological or physical
            disturbance to an ecosystem occurs, it may return to
            its more or less original status (i.e., the ecosystem is
            resilient), as opposed to becoming a very different
            ecosystem. Extreme fluctuations in conditions or the
            size of any population, however, can challenge the
            functioning of ecosystems in terms of resources and
            habitat availability. (HS-LS2-2), (HS-LS2-6)
            - Moreover, anthropogenic changes (induced by
            human activity) in the environment—including habitat destruction, pollution, introduction of invasive
            species, overexploitation, and climate change—can
            disrupt an ecosystem and threaten the survival of
            some species. (HS-LS2-7)
            LS2.D: Social Interactions and Group Behavior
            - Group behavior has evolved because membership
            can increase the chances of survival for individuals
            and their genetic relatives. (HS-LS2-8)
            LS4.D: Biodiversity and Humans
            - Biodiversity is increased by the formation of new
            species (speciation) and decreased by the loss of
            species (extinction). (secondary to HS-LS2-7)
            - Humans depend on the living world for the resources and other benefits provided by biodiversity. But
            human activity is also having adverse impacts on
            biodiversity through overpopulation, overexploitation, habitat destruction, pollution, introduction of
            invasive species, and climate change. Thus sustaining biodiversity so that ecosystem functioning and
            productivity are maintained is essential to supporting and enhancing life on Earth. Sustaining biodiversity also aids humanity by preserving landscapes
            of recreational or inspirational value. (secondary to
            HS-LS2-7) (Note: This Disciplinary Core Idea is also
            addressed by HS-LS4-6.)
            PS3.D: Energy in Chemical Processes
            - The main way that solar energy is captured and
            stored on Earth is through the complex chemical
            process known as photosynthesis. (secondary to
            HS-LS2-5)
            ETS1.B: Developing Possible Solutions
            - When evaluating solutions it is important to take
            into account a range of constraints including cost,
            safety, reliability and aesthetics and to consider social, cultural and environmental impacts. (secondary
            to HS-LS2-7)
        ]
    }
    HS-LS3 Heredity: Inheritance and Variation of Traits: {
        Core Ideas: [
            LS1.A: Structure and Function
            - All cells contain genetic information in the form of
            DNA molecules. Genes are regions in the DNA that
            contain the instructions that code for the formation
            of proteins. (secondary to HS-LS3-1) (Note: This
            Disciplinary Core Idea is also addressed by HSLS1-1.)
            LS3.A: Inheritance of Traits
            - Each chromosome consists of a single very long
            DNA molecule, and each gene on the chromosome
            is a particular segment of that DNA. The instructions
            for forming species’ characteristics are carried in
            DNA. All cells in an organism have the same genetic
            content, but the genes used (expressed) by the cell
            may be regulated in different ways. Not all DNA
            codes for a protein; some segments of DNA are
            involved in regulatory or structural functions, and
            some have no as-yet known function. (HS-LS3-1)
            LS3.B: Variation of Traits
            - In sexual reproduction, chromosomes can sometimes swap sections during the process of meiosis
            (cell division), thereby creating new genetic combinations and thus more genetic variation. Although
            DNA replication is tightly regulated and remarkably
            accurate, errors do occur and result in mutations,
            which are also a source of genetic variation. Environmental factors can also cause mutations in genes,
            and viable mutations are inherited. (HS-LS3-2)
            - Environmental factors also affect expression of
            traits, and hence affect the probability of occurrences of traits in a population. Thus the variation
            and distribution of traits observed depends on both
            genetic and environmental factors. (HS-LS3-2), (HSLS3-3)
        ]
    }
    HS-LS4 Biological Evolution: Unity and Diversity: {
        Core Ideas: [
            LS4.A: Evidence of Common Ancestry and Diversity
            - Genetic information provides evidence of evolution.
            DNA sequences vary among species, but there are
            many overlaps; in fact, the ongoing branching that
            produces multiple lines of descent can be inferred by
            comparing the DNA sequences of different organisms.
            Such information is also derivable from the similarities
            and differences in amino acid sequences and from
            anatomical and embryological evidence. (HS-LS4-1)
            LS4.B: Natural Selection
            - Natural selection occurs only if there is both
            (1) variation in the genetic information between
            organisms in a population and (2) variation in the
            expression of that genetic information—that is, trait
            variation—that leads to differences in performance
            among individuals. (HS-LS4-2), (HS-LS4-3)
            - The traits that positively affect survival are more
            likely to be reproduced, and thus are more common
            in the population. (HS-LS4-3)
            LS4.C: Adaptation
            - Evolution is a consequence of the interaction of four
            factors: (1) the potential for a species to increase
            in number, (2) the genetic variation of individuals in
            a species due to mutation and sexual reproduction,
            (3) competition for an environment’s limited supply
            of the resources that individuals need in order to
            survive and reproduce, and (4) the ensuing proliferation of those organisms that are better able to survive and reproduce in that environment. (HS-LS4-2)
            Natural selection leads to adaptation, that is, to
            a population dominated by organisms that are
            anatomically, behaviorally, and physiologically
            well suited to survive and reproduce in a specific
            environment. That is, the differential survival and
            reproduction of organisms in a population that have
            an advantageous heritable trait leads to an increase
            in the proportion of individuals in future generations that have the trait and to a decrease in the
            proportion of individuals that do not. (HS-LS4-3),
            (HS-LS4-4)
            - Adaptation also means that the distribution of
            traits in a population can change when conditions
            change. (HS-LS4-3)
            - Changes in the physical environment, whether
            naturally occurring or human induced, have thus
            contributed to the expansion of some species, the
            emergence of new distinct species as populations
            diverge under different conditions, and the decline–
            and sometimes the extinction–of some species.
            (HS-LS4-5), (HS-LS4-6)
            - Species become extinct because they can no longer
            survive and reproduce in their altered environment.
            If members cannot adjust to change that is too fast
            or drastic, the opportunity for the species’ evolution
            is lost. (HS-LS4-5)
            LS4.D: Biodiversity and Humans
            - Humans depend on the living world for the resources and other benefits provided by biodiversity. But
            human activity is also having adverse impacts on
            biodiversity through overpopulation, overexploitation
            habitat destruction, pollution, introduction of
            invasive species, and climate change. Thus sustaining biodiversity so that ecosystem functioning and
            productivity are maintained is essential to supporting and enhancing life on Earth. Sustaining biodiversity also aids humanity by preserving landscapes
            of recreational or inspirational value. (HS-LS4-6)
            (Note: This Disciplinary Core Idea is also addressed
            by HS-LS2-7.)
            ETS1.B: Developing Possible Solutions
            - When evaluating solutions, it is important to take
            into account a range of constraints, including cost,
            safety, reliability, and aesthetics, and to consider
            social, cultural, and environmental impacts. (secondary to HS-LS4-6)
            - Both physical models and computers can be used
            in various ways to aid in the engineering design process. Computers are useful for a variety of purposes,
            such as running simulations to test different ways
            of solving a problem or to see which one is most
            efficient or economical; and in making a persuasive
            presentation to a client about how a given design
            will meet his or her needs. (secondary to HS-LS4-6)
        ]
    }
]