NGSS Grade Seven - Science (CA Dept of Education): [
    MS-LS1 From Molecules to Organisms: Structures and Processes: {
        Core Ideas: [
            LS1.C: Organization for Matter and Energy Flow in
            Organisms
            - Plants, algae (including phytoplankton), and many
            microorganisms use the energy from light to make
            sugars (food) from carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and water through the process of photosynthesis, which also releases oxygen. These sugars can
            be used immediately or stored for growth or later
            use. (MS-LS1-6)
            - Within individual organisms, food moves through
            a series of chemical reactions in which it is broken
            down and rearranged to form new molecules, to
            support growth, or to release energy. (MS-LS1-7)
            PS3.D: Energy in Chemical Processes and Everyday
            Life
            - The chemical reaction by which plants produce
            complex food molecules (sugars) requires an energy
            input (i.e., from sunlight) to occur. In this reaction,
            carbon dioxide and water combine to form carbon-based organic molecules and release oxygen.
            (secondary to MS-LS1-6)
            - Cellular respiration in plants and animals involve
            chemical reactions with oxygen that release stored
            energy. In these processes, complex molecules
            containing carbon react with oxygen to produce
            carbon dioxide and other materials. (secondary to MS-LS1-7)
        ]
    },
    MS-LS2 Ecosystems: Interactions, Energy, and Dynamics: {
        Core Ideas: [
            LS2.A: Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
            - Organisms, and populations of organisms, are
            dependent on their environmental interactions both
            with other living things and with nonliving factors.
            (MS-LS2-1)
            - In any ecosystem, organisms and populations with
            similar requirements for food, water, oxygen, or other
            resources may compete with each other for limited
            resources, access to which consequently constrains
            their growth and reproduction. (MS-LS2-1)
            - Growth of organisms and population increases are
            limited by access to resources. (MS-LS2-1)
            - Similarly, predatory interactions may reduce the
            number of organisms or eliminate whole populations
            of organisms. Mutually beneficial interactions, in
            contrast, may become so interdependent that each
            organism requires the other for survival. Although
            the species involved in these competitive, predatory, and mutually beneficial interactions vary
            across ecosystems, the patterns of interactions of
            organisms with their environments, both living and
            nonliving, are shared. (MS-LS2-2)
            LS2.B: Cycle of Matter and Energy Transfer in
            Ecosystems
            - Food webs are models that demonstrate how matter
            and energy is transferred between producers,
            consumers, and decomposers as the three groups
            interact within an ecosystem. Transfers of matter into
            and out of the physical environment occur at every
            level. Decomposers recycle nutrients from dead
            plant or animal matter back to the soil in terrestrial
            environments or to the water in aquatic environments. The atoms that make up the organisms in an
            ecosystem are cycled repeatedly between the living
            and nonliving parts of the ecosystem. (MS-LS2-3)
            LS2.C: Ecosystem Dynamics, Functioning, and
            Resilience
            - Ecosystems are dynamic in nature; their characteristics can vary over time. Disruptions to any physical
            or biological component of an ecosystem can lead
            to shifts in all its populations. (MS-LS2-4)
            - Biodiversity describes the variety of species found in
            Earth’s terrestrial and oceanic ecosystems. The completeness or integrity of an ecosystem’s biodiversity is
            often used as a measure of its health. (MS-LS2-5)
            LS4.D: Biodiversity and Humans
            - Changes in biodiversity can influence humans’
            resources, such as food, energy, and medicines, as
            well as ecosystem services that humans rely on—for
            example, water purification and recycling. (secondary to MS-LS2-5)
            ETS1.B: Developing Possible Solutions
            - There are systematic processes for evaluating
            solutions with respect to how well they meet the
            criteria and constraints of a problem. (secondary to
            MS-LS2-5)
        ]
    },
    MS-ESS2 Earth’s Systems: {
        Core Ideas: [
            ESS1.C: The History of Planet Earth
            - Tectonic processes continually generate new ocean
            sea floor at ridges and destroy old sea floor at
            trenches. (HS.ESS1.C GBE) (secondary to MSESS2-3)
            ESS2.A: Earth’s Materials and Systems
            - All Earth processes are the result of energy flowing
            and matter cycling within and among the planet’s
            systems. This energy is derived from the sun and
            Earth’s hot interior. The energy that flows and matter
            that cycles produce chemical and physical changes
            in Earth’s materials and living organisms. (MSESS2-1)
            - The planet’s systems interact over scales that range
            from microscopic to global in size, and they operate
            over fractions of a second to billions of years. These
            interactions have shaped Earth’s history and will
            determine its future. (MS-ESS2-2)
            ESS2.B: Plate Tectonics and Large-Scale System
            Interactions
            - Maps of ancient land and water patterns, based on
            investigations of rocks and fossils, make clear how
            Earth’s plates have moved great distances, collided,
            and spread apart. (MS-ESS2-3)
            ESS2.C: The Roles of Water in Earth’s Surface
            Processes
            - Water’s movements—both on the land and underground—cause weathering and erosion, which
            change the land’s surface features and create
            underground formations. (MS-ESS2-2)
        ]
    },
    MS-ESS3 Earth and Human Activity: {
        Core Ideas: [
            ESS3.A: Natural Resources
            - Humans depend on Earth’s land, ocean, atmosphere, and biosphere for many different resources.
            Minerals, fresh water, and biosphere resources are
            limited, and many are not renewable or replaceable
            over human lifetimes. These resources are distributed unevenly around the planet as a result of past
            geologic processes. (MS-ESS3-1)
            ESS3.B: Natural Hazards
            - Mapping the history of natural hazards in a region,
            combined with an understanding of related geologic
            forces can help forecast the locations and likelihoods of future events. (MS-ESS3-2)
        ]
    },
    MS-PS1 Matter and Its Interactions: {
        Core Ideas: [
            PS1.A: Structure and Properties of Matter
            - Substances are made from different types of atoms,
            which combine with one another in various ways.
            Atoms form molecules that range in size from two to
            thousands of atoms. (MS-PS1-1)
            - Each pure substance has characteristic physical and
            chemical properties (for any bulk quantity under
            given conditions) that can be used to identify it.
            (MS-PS1-2), (MS-PS1-3)
            - Gases and liquids are made of molecules or inert
            atoms that are moving about relative to each other.
            (MS-PS1-4)
            - In a liquid, the molecules are constantly in contact
            with others; in a gas, they are widely spaced except
            when they happen to collide. In a solid, atoms are
            closely spaced and may vibrate in position but do
            not change relative locations. (MS-PS1-4)
            - Solids may be formed from molecules, or they may
            be extended structures with repeating subunits (e.g.,
            crystals). (MS-PS1-1)
            - The changes of state that occur with variations in
            temperature or pressure can be described and predicted using these models of matter. (MS-PS1-4)
            PS1.B: Chemical Reactions
            - Substances react chemically in characteristic ways.
            In a chemical process, the atoms that make up the
            original substances are regrouped into different
            molecules, and these new substances have different
            properties from those of the reactants. (MS-PS1-2),
            (MS-PS1-3), (MS-PS1-5)
            - The total number of each type of atom is conserved,
            and thus the mass does not change. (MS-PS1-5)
            - Some chemical reactions release energy, others
            store energy. (MS-PS1-6)
            PS3.A: Definitions of Energy
            - The term “heat” as used in everyday language refers
            both to thermal energy (the motion of atoms or
            molecules within a substance) and the transfer of
            that thermal energy from one object to another. In
            science, heat is used only for this second meaning;
            it refers to the energy transferred due to the temperature difference between two objects. (secondary
            to MS-PS1-4)
            - The temperature of a system is proportional to the
            average internal kinetic energy and potential energy
            per atom or molecule (whichever is the appropriate
            building block for the system’s material). The details
            of that relationship depend on the type of atom or
            molecule and the interactions among the atoms in
            the material. Temperature is not a direct measure
            of a system’s total thermal energy. The total thermal
            energy (sometimes called the total internal energy)
            of a system depends jointly on the temperature, the
            total number of atoms in the system, and the state
            of the material. (secondary to MS-PS1-4)
            ETS1.B: Developing Possible Solutions
            - A solution needs to be tested, and then modified on
            the basis of the test results, in order to improve it.
            (secondary to MS-PS1-6)
            ETS1.C: Optimizing the Design Solution
            - Although one design may not perform the best
            across all tests, identifying the characteristics of
            the design that performed the best in each test can
            provide useful information for the redesign process—
            that is, some of the characteristics may be incorporated into the new design. (secondary to MS-PS1-6)
            - The iterative process of testing the most promising
            solutions and modifying what is proposed on the
            basis of the test results leads to greater refinement
            and ultimately to an optimal solution. (secondary to
            MS-PS1-6)
        ]
    }

]