NGSS, Grade 6 Earth & Space Science - Science (CA Dept of Education): [
    MS-ESS1 Earth’s Place in the Universe: {
        Core Ideas: [
            ESS1.A: The Universe and Its Stars
            - Patterns of the apparent motion of the sun, the
            moon, and stars in the sky can be observed,
            described, predicted, and explained with models.
            (MS-ESS1-1)
            - Earth and its solar system are part of the Milky Way
            galaxy, which is one of many galaxies in the universe.
            (MS-ESS1-2)
            ***Supplemental DCI PS2.B
            ESS1.B: Earth and the Solar System
            - The solar system consists of the sun and a collection of objects, including planets, their moons, and
            asteroids that are held in orbit around the sun by
            its gravitational pull on them. (MS-ESS1-2), (MSESS1-3)
            ***Supplemental DCI PS2.B
            - This model of the solar system can explain eclipses
            of the sun and the moon. Earth’s spin axis is fixed
            in direction over the short-term but tilted relative to
            its orbit around the sun. The seasons are a result of
            that tilt and are caused by the differential intensity
            of sunlight on different areas of Earth across the
            year. (MS-ESS1-1)
            - The solar system appears to have formed from a
            disk of dust and gas, drawn together by gravity. (MSESS1-2)
            ESS1.C: The History of Planet Earth
            - The geologic time scale interpreted from rock strata
            provides a way to organize Earth’s history. Analyses
            of rock strata and the fossil record provide only relative dates, not an absolute scale. (MS-ESS1-4)
        ]
    },
    MS-ESS2 Earth’s Systems: {
        Core Ideas: [
            ESS1.C: The History of Planet Earth
            - Tectonic processes continually generate new ocean
            sea foor at ridges and destroy old sea foor at
            trenches. (HS.ESS1.C GBE) (secondary to MSESS2-3)
            ESS2.A: Earth’s Materials and Systems
            - All Earth processes are the result of energy fowing
            and matter cycling within and among the planet’s
            systems. This energy is derived from the sun and
            Earth’s hot interior. The energy that fows and matter
            that cycles produce chemical and physical changes in
            Earth’s materials and living organisms. (MS-ESS2-1)
            ***Supplemental DCI PS1.A
            - The planet’s systems interact over scales that range
            from microscopic to global in size, and they operate
            over fractions of a second to billions of years. These
            interactions have shaped Earth’s history and will
            determine its future. (MS-ESS2-2)
            ESS2.B: Plate Tectonics and Large-Scale System
            Interactions
            - Maps of ancient land and water patterns, based on
            investigations of rocks and fossils, make clear how
            Earth’s plates have moved great distances, collided,
            and spread apart. (MS-ESS2-3)
            ***Supplemental DCI LS4.A
            ESS2.C: The Roles of Water in Earth’s Surface
            Processes
            - Water’s movements—both on the land and underground—cause weathering and erosion, which
            change the land’s surface features and create
            underground formations. (MS-ESS2-2)
            ESS2.C: The Roles of Water in Earth’s Surface
            Processes
            - Water continually cycles among land, ocean, and
            atmosphere via transpiration, evaporation, condensation and crystallization, and precipitation, as well
            as downhill flows on land. (MS-ESS2-4)
            ***Supplemental DCI PS1.A
            - The complex patterns of the changes and the
            movement of water in the atmosphere, determined
            by winds, landforms, and ocean temperatures and
            currents, are major determinants of local weather
            patterns. (MS-ESS2-5)
             Global movements of water and its changes in form
            are propelled by sunlight and gravity. (MS-ESS2-4)
            - Variations in density due to variations in temperature and salinity drive a global pattern of interconnected ocean currents. (MS-ESS2-6)
            ***Supplemental DCI PS3.B, PS4.B
            ESS2.D: Weather and Climate
            - Weather and climate are influenced by interactions
            involving sunlight, the ocean, the atmosphere, ice,
            landforms, and living things. These interactions
            vary with latitude, altitude, and local and regional
            geography, all of which can affect oceanic and atmospheric flow patterns. (MS-ESS2-6)
            - Because these patterns are so complex, weather
            can only be predicted probabilistically. (MS-ESS2-5)
            - The ocean exerts a major influence on weather and
            climate by absorbing energy from the sun, releasing
            it over time, and globally redistributing it through
            ocean currents. (MS-ESS2-6)
        ]
    },
    MS-ESS3 Earth and Human Activity: {
        Core Ideas: [
            ESS3.A: Natural Resources
            - Humans depend on Earth’s land, ocean, atmosphere, and biosphere for many different resources.
            Minerals, fresh water, and biosphere resources are
            limited, and many are not renewable or replaceable
            over human lifetimes. These resources are distributed unevenly around the planet as a result of past
            geologic processes. (MS-ESS3-1)
            ESS3.B: Natural Hazards
            - Mapping the history of natural hazards in a region,
            combined with an understanding of related geologic
            forces can help forecast the locations and likelihoods of future events. (MS-ESS3-2)
            ESS3.C: Human Impacts on Earth Systems
            - Typically as human populations and per-capita
            consumption of natural resources increase, so do
            the negative impacts on Earth unless the activities
            and technologies involved are engineered otherwise.
            (MS-ESS3-4)
            ESS3.C: Human Impacts on Earth Systems
            - Human activities have significantly altered the biosphere, sometimes damaging or destroying natural
            habitats and causing the extinction of other species. But changes to Earth’s environments can have
            different impacts (negative and positive) for different
            living things. (MS-ESS3-3)
            ESS3.D: Global Climate Change
            - Human activities, such as the release of greenhouse gases from burning fossil fuels, are major
            factors in the current rise in Earth’s mean surface
            temperature (global warming). Reducing the level of
            climate change and reducing human vulnerability
            to whatever climate changes do occur depend on
            the understanding of climate science, engineering
            capabilities, and other kinds of knowledge, such as
            understanding of human behavior and on applying
            that knowledge wisely in decisions and activities.
            (MS-ESS3–5)
        ]
    }
]
