Grade 8 Preferred Integrated Model - Science (CA Dept of Education): [
    MS-LS3 Heredity: Inheritance and Variation of Traits: {
        Core Ideas: [
            LS3.A: Inheritance of Traits
            - Genes are located in the chromosomes of cells,
            with each chromosome pair containing two variants
            of each of many distinct genes. Each distinct gene
            chiefly controls the production of specific proteins,
            which in turn affects the traits of the individual.
            Changes (mutations) to genes can result in changes to proteins, which can affect the structures and
            functions of the organism and thereby change traits.
            (MS-LS3-1)
            LS3.B: Variation of Traits
            - In addition to variations that arise from sexual reproduction, genetic information can be altered because
            of mutations. Though rare, mutations may result in
            changes to the structure and function of proteins.
            Some changes are beneficial, others harmful, and
            some neutral to the organism. (MS-LS3-1)
        ]
    },
    MS-LS4 Biological Evolution: Unity and Diversity: {
        Core Ideas: [
            LS4.A: Evidence of Common Ancestry and Diversity
            - The collection of fossils and their placement in
            chronological order (e.g., through the location of
            the sedimentary layers in which they are found or
            through radioactive dating) is known as the fossil
            record. It documents the existence, diversity, extinction, and change of many life forms throughout the
            history of life on Earth. (MS-LS4-1)
            - Anatomical similarities and differences between
            various organisms living today and between them
            and organisms in the fossil record enable the reconstruction of evolutionary history and the inference of
            lines of evolutionary descent. (MS-LS4-2)
            - Comparison of the embryological development of
            different species also reveals similarities that show
            relationships not evident in the fully formed anatomy. (MS-LS4-3)
            LS4.B: Natural Selection
            - Natural selection leads to the predominance of
            certain traits in a population, and the suppression of
            others. (MS-LS4-4)
            - In artificial selection, humans have the capacity to
            influence certain characteristics of organisms by
            selective breeding. One can choose desired parental
            traits determined by genes, which are then passed
            on to offspring. (MS-LS4-5)
            LS4.C: Adaptation
            - Adaptation by natural selection acting over generations is one important process by which species
            change over time in response to changes in environmental conditions. Traits that support successful
            survival and reproduction in the new environment
            become more common; those that do not become
            less common. Thus, the distribution of traits in a
            population changes. (MS-LS4-6)
        ]
    },
    MS-ESS1 Earth’s Place in the Universe: {
        Core Ideas: [
            ESS1.A: The Universe and Its Stars
            - Patterns of the apparent motion of the sun, the
            moon, and stars in the sky can be observed,
            described, predicted, and explained with models.
            (MS-ESS1-1)
            - Earth and its solar system are part of the Milky Way
            galaxy, which is one of many galaxies in the universe.
            (MS-ESS1-2)
            ESS1.B: Earth and the Solar System
            - The solar system consists of the sun and a collection of objects, including planets, their moons, and
            asteroids that are held in orbit around the sun by
            its gravitational pull on them. (MS-ESS1-2), (MSESS1-3)
            - This model of the solar system can explain eclipses
            of the sun and the moon. Earth’s spin axis is fixed
            in direction over the short-term but tilted relative to
            its orbit around the sun. The seasons are a result of
            that tilt and are caused by the differential intensity
            of sunlight on different areas of Earth across the
            year. (MS-ESS1-1)
            - The solar system appears to have formed from a
            disk of dust and gas, drawn together by gravity. (MSESS1-2)
            ESS1.C: The History of Planet Earth
            - The geologic time scale interpreted from rock strata
            provides a way to organize Earth’s history. Analyses
            of rock strata and the fossil record provide only relative dates, not an absolute scale. (MS-ESS1-4)
        ]
    },
    MS-ESS3 Earth and Human Activity: {
        Core Ideas: [
            ESS3.C: Human Impacts on Earth Systems
            - Typically as human populations and per-capita
            consumption of natural resources increase, so do
            the negative impacts on Earth unless the activities
            and technologies involved are engineered otherwise.
            (MS-ESS3-4)
        ]
    },
    MS-PS2 Motion and Stability: Forces and Interactions: {
        Core Ideas: [
            PS2.A: Forces and Motion
            - For any pair of interacting objects, the force exerted
            by the first object on the second object is equal in
            strength to the force that the second object exerts
            on the first, but in the opposite direction (Newton’s
            Third Law). (MS-PS2-1)
             The motion of an object is determined by the sum
            of the forces acting on it; if the total force on the
            object is not zero, its motion will change. The greater
            the mass of the object, the greater the force needed
            to achieve the same change in motion. For any given
            object, a larger force causes a larger change in
            motion. (MS-PS2-2)
            - All positions of objects and the directions of forces
            and motions must be described in an arbitrarily chosen reference frame and arbitrarily chosen units of
            size. In order to share information with other people,
            these choices must also be shared. (MS-PS2-2)
            PS2.B: Types of Interactions
            - Electric and magnetic (electromagnetic) forces can
            be attractive or repulsive, and their sizes depend on
            the magnitudes of the charges, currents, or magnetic strengths involved and on the distances between
            the interacting objects. (MS-PS2-3)
            - Gravitational forces are always attractive. There is a
            gravitational force between any two masses, but it is
            very small except when one or both of the objects
            have large mass—e.g., Earth and the sun. (MSPS2-4)
            - Forces that act at a distance (electric, magnetic,
            and gravitational) can be explained by fields that
            extend through space and can be mapped by their
            effect on a test object (a charged object, or a ball,
            respectively). (MS-PS2-5)
        ]
    },
    MS-PS3 Energy: {
        Core Ideas: [
            PS3.A: Definitions of Energy
            - Motion energy is properly called kinetic energy; it is
            proportional to the mass of the moving object and
            grows with the square of its speed. (MS-PS3-1)
            - A system of objects may also contain stored (potential) energy, depending on their relative positions.
            (MS-PS3-2)
            PS3.C: Relationship Between Energy and Forces
            - When two objects interact, each one exerts a force
            on the other that can cause energy to be transferred
            to or from the object. (MS-PS3-2)
        ]
    },
    MS-PS4 Waves and Their Applications in Technologies for Information Transfer: {
        Core Ideas: [
            PS4.A: Wave Properties
            - A simple wave has a repeating pattern with a
            specific wavelength, frequency, and amplitude. (MSPS4-1)
            - A sound wave needs a medium through which it is
            transmitted. (MS-PS4-2)
            PS4.B: Electromagnetic Radiation
            - When light shines on an object, it is reflected,
            absorbed, or transmitted through the object, depending on the object’s material and the frequency
            (color) of the light. (MS-PS4-2)
            - The path that light travels can be traced as straight
            lines, except at surfaces between different transparent materials (e.g., air and water, air and glass)
            where the light path bends. (MS-PS4-2)
            - A wave model of light is useful for explaining brightness, color, and the frequency-dependent bending
            of light at a surface between media. (MS-PS4-2)
            - However, because light can travel through space, it
            cannot be a matter wave, like sound or water waves.
            (MS-PS4-2)
            PS4.C: Information Technologies and Instrumentation
            - Digitized signals (sent as wave pulses) are a more
            reliable way to encode and transmit information.
            (MS-PS4-3)
        ]
    }
]