Discipline Specific Grade 7 Life Sciences - Science (CA Dept of Education): [
    MS-LS1 From Molecules to Organisms: Structures and Processes: {
        Core Ideas: [
            LS1.A: Structure and Function
            - All living things are made up of cells. A cell is the
            smallest unit that can be said to be alive. An organism may consist of one single cell (unicellular) or
            many different numbers and types of cells (multicellular). (MS-LS1-1)
            - Within cells, special structures are responsible for
            particular functions, and the cell membrane forms
            the boundary that controls what enters and leaves
            the cell. (MS-LS1-2)
            - In multicellular organisms, the body is a system of
            multiple interacting subsystems. These subsystems
            are groups of cells that work together to form tissues
            and organs that are specialized for particular body
            functions. (MS-LS1-3)
            LS1.B: Growth and Development of Organisms
            - Animals engage in characteristic behaviors that
            increase the odds of reproduction. (MS-LS1-4)
            - Plants reproduce in a variety of ways, sometimes
            depending on animal behavior and specialized
            features for reproduction. (MS-LS1-4)
            - Genetic factors as well as local conditions affect the
            growth of the adult plant. (MS-LS1-5)
            LS1.D: Information Processing
            - Each sense receptor responds to different inputs
            (electromagnetic, mechanical, chemical), transmitting them as signals that travel along nerve cells
            to the brain. The signals are then processed in the
            brain, resulting in immediate behaviors or memories.(MS-LS1-8)
            LS1.C: Organization for Matter and Energy Flow in Organisms
            - Plants, algae (including phytoplankton), and many
            microorganisms use the energy from light to make
            sugars (food) from carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and water through the process of photosynthesis, which also releases oxygen. These sugars can
            be used immediately or stored for growth or later
            use. (MS-LS1-6)
            ***Supplemental DCI PS1.A, PS1.B and grade 5
            PS3.D
            - Within individual organisms, food moves through
            a series of chemical reactions in which it is broken
            down and rearranged to form new molecules, to
            support growth, or to release energy. (MS-LS1-7)
            PS3.D: Energy in Chemical Processes and Everyday
            Life
            - The chemical reaction by which plants produce
            complex food molecules (sugars) requires an energy
            input (i.e., from sunlight) to occur. In this reaction,
            carbon dioxide and water combine to form carbon-based organic molecules and release oxygen.
            (secondary to MS-LS1-6)
            - Cellular respiration in plants and animals involve
            chemical reactions with oxygen that release stored
            energy. In these processes, complex molecules
            containing carbon react with oxygen to produce
            carbon dioxide and other materials. (secondary to
            MS-LS1-7)
        ]
    },
    MS-LS2 Ecosystems: Interactions, Energy, and Dynamics: {
        Core Ideas: [
            LS2.A: Interdependent Relationships in Ecosystems
            - Organisms, and populations of organisms, are
            dependent on their environmental interactions both
            with other living things and with nonliving factors.
            (MS-LS2-1)
            ***Supplemental DCI PS1.B
            - In any ecosystem, organisms and populations with
            similar requirements for food, water, oxygen, or other
            resources may compete with each other for limited
            resources, access to which consequently constrains
            their growth and reproduction. (MS-LS2-1)
            - Growth of organisms and population increases are
            limited by access to resources. (MS-LS2-1)
            - Similarly, predatory interactions may reduce the
            number of organisms or eliminate whole populations
            of organisms. Mutually beneficial interactions, in
            contrast, may become so interdependent that each
            organism requires the other for survival. Although
            the species involved in these competitive, predatory, and mutually beneficial interactions vary
            across ecosystems, the patterns of interactions of
            organisms with their environments, both living and
            nonliving, are shared. (MS-LS2-2)
            LS2.B: Cycle of Matter and Energy Transfer in
            Ecosystems
            - Food webs are models that demonstrate how matter
            and energy is transferred between producers,
            consumers, and decomposers as the three groups
            interact within an ecosystem. Transfers of matter into
            and out of the physical environment occur at every
            level. Decomposers recycle nutrients from dead
            plant or animal matter back to the soil in terrestrial
            environments or to the water in aquatic environments. The atoms that make up the organisms in an
            ecosystem are cycled repeatedly between the living
            and nonliving parts of the ecosystem. (MS-LS2-3)
            ***Supplemental DCI PS1.B, ESS2.A
            LS2.C: Ecosystem Dynamics, Functioning, and
            Resilience
            - Ecosystems are dynamic in nature; their characteristics can vary over time. Disruptions to any physical
            or biological component of an ecosystem can lead
            to shifts in all its populations. (MS-LS2-4)
            - Biodiversity describes the variety of species found
            in Earth’s terrestrial and oceanic ecosystems. The
            completeness or integrity of an ecosystem’s biodiversity is often used as a measure of its health.
            (MS-LS2-5)
            ***Supplemental DCI PS1.B, ESS3.A, ESS3.C
            LS4.D: Biodiversity and Humans
            - Changes in biodiversity can influence humans’
            resources, such as food, energy, and medicines, as
            well as ecosystem services that humans rely on—for
            example, water purification and recycling. (secondary to MS-LS2-5)
            ETS1.B: Developing Possible Solutions
            - There are systematic processes for evaluating
            solutions with respect to how well they meet the
            criteria and constraints of a problem. (secondary to
            MS-LS2-5)
        ]
    },
    MS-LS3 Heredity: Inheritance and Variation of Traits: {
        Core Ideas: [
            LS3.A: Inheritance of Traits
            - Genes are located in the chromosomes of cells,
            with each chromosome pair containing two variants
            of each of many distinct genes. Each distinct gene
            chiefly controls the production of specific proteins,
            which in turn affects the traits of the individual.
            Changes (mutations) to genes can result in changes to proteins, which can affect the structures and
            functions of the organism and thereby change traits.
            (MS-LS3-1)
            LS3.B: Variation of Traits
            - In addition to variations that arise from sexual reproduction, genetic information can be altered because
            of mutations. Though rare, mutations may result in
            changes to the structure and function of proteins.
            Some changes are beneficial, others harmful, and
            some neutral to the organism. (MS-LS3-1)
            LS1.B: Growth and Development of Organisms
            - Organisms reproduce, either sexually or asexually,
            and transfer their genetic information to their offspring. (secondary to MS-LS3-2)
            LS3.A: Inheritance of Traits
            - Variations of inherited traits between parent and offspring arise from genetic differences that result from
            the subset of chromosomes (and therefore genes)
            inherited. (MS-LS3-2)
            LS3.B: Variation of Traits
            - In sexually reproducing organisms, each parent
            contributes half of the genes acquired (at random)
            by the offspring. Individuals have two of each chromosome and hence two alleles of each gene, one
            acquired from each parent. These versions may be
            identical or may differ from each other. (MS-LS3-2)
        ]
    },
    MS-LS4 Biological Evolution: Unity and Diversity: {
        Core Ideas: [
            LS4.A: Evidence of Common Ancestry and Diversity
            - The collection of fossils and their placement in
            chronological order (e.g., through the location of
            the sedimentary layers in which they are found or
            through radioactive dating) is known as the fossil
            record. It documents the existence, diversity, extinction, and change of many life forms throughout the
            history of life on Earth. (MS-LS4-1)
            ***Supplemental DCI ESS1.C, ESS2.B
            - Anatomical similarities and differences between various organisms living today and between them and
            organisms in the fossil record, enable the reconstruction of evolutionary history and the inference of
            lines of evolutionary descent. (MS-LS4-2)
            ***Supplemental DCI ESS1.C
            - Comparison of the embryological development of
            different species also reveals similarities that show
            relationships not evident in the fully formed anatomy. (MS-LS4-3)
            LS4.B: Natural Selection
            - Natural selection leads to the predominance of
            certain traits in a population, and the suppression of
            others. (MS-LS4-4)
            - In artificial selection, humans have the capacity to
            influence certain characteristics of organisms by
            selective breeding. One can choose desired parental
            traits determined by genes, which are then passed
            on to offspring. (MS-LS4-5)
            LS4.C: Adaptation
            - Adaptation by natural selection acting over generations is one important process by which species
            change over time in response to changes in environmental conditions. Traits that support successful
            survival and reproduction in the new environment
            become more common; those that do not become
            less common. Thus, the distribution of traits in a
            population changes. (MS-LS4-6)
        ]
    }
]