Oklahoma Academic Standards for Science 6th Grade: [
    Matter and Its Interactions (PS1): {
        Core Ideas: [•Gases and liquids are made of molecules or inert atoms that are
            moving about relative to each other. In a liquid, the molecules are
            constantly in contact with others; in a gas, they are widely spaced
            except when they happen to collide. In a solid, atoms are closely
            spaced and may vibrate in position but do not change relative
            locations.
            • The changes of state that occur with variations in temperature or
            pressure can be described and predicted using these models of
            matter.
            • The term “heat” as used in everyday language refers both to thermal
            energy (the motion of atoms or molecules within a substance) and the
            transfer of that thermal energy from one object to another. In science,
            heat is used only for this second meaning; it refers to the energy
            transferred due to the temperature difference between two objects.
            • The temperature of a system is proportional to the average internal
            kinetic energy and potential energy per atom or molecule (whichever
            is the appropriate building block for the system’s material). The
            details of that relationship depend on the type of atom or molecule
            and the interactions among the atoms in the material.
            • Temperature is not a direct measure of a system’s total thermal
            energy. The total thermal energy (sometimes called the total internal
            energy) of a system depends jointly on the temperature, the total
            number of atoms in the system, and the state of the material.]
    },
    Energy (PS3): {
        Core Ideas: [•Temperature is a measure of the average kinetic energy of particles
            of matter.
            • The relationship between the temperature and the total energy of a
            system depends on the types, states, and amounts of matter present.
            • Energy is spontaneously transferred out of hotter regions or objects
            and into colder ones.
            • The more precisely a design task’s criteria and constraints can be
            defined, the more likely it is that the designed solution will be
            successful.
            • Specification of constraints includes consideration of scientific
            principles and other relevant knowledge that is likely to limit possible
            solutions.
            • A solution needs to be tested, and then modified on the basis of the
            test results in order to improve it.
            • There are systematic processes for evaluating solutions with respect
            to how well they meet criteria and constraints of a problem. 
            • Temperature is a measure of the average kinetic energy of particles
            of matter.
            • The relationship between the temperature and the total energy of a
            system depends on the types, states, and amounts of matter present.
            • The amount of energy transfer needed to change the temperature of
            a matter sample by a given amount depends on the nature of the
            matter, the size of the sample, and the environment. ],
        Crosscutting Concepts: [-Energy and Matter:
                            • The transfer of energy can
                            be tracked as energy flows
                            through a designed or
                            natural system. ]
    },
    Waves and Their Applications in Technologies for Information Transfer (PS4): {
        Core Ideas: [• A sound wave needs a medium through which it is transmitted.
                    • When light shines on an object, it is reflected, absorbed, or
                    transmitted through the object, depending on the object’s material
                    and the frequency (color) of the light.
                    • The path that light can travel can be traced as straight lines, except
                    at surfaces between different transparent materials (e.g., air and
                    water, air and glass) where the light path bends.
                    • A wave model of light is useful for explaining brightness, color, and
                    the frequency-dependent bending of light at a surface between
                    media. However, because light can travel through space, it cannot
                    be a matter wave, like sound or water waves.]
    },
    From Molecules to Organisms: Structure and Processes (LS1): {
        Core Ideas: [
            • All living things are made up of cells, which is the smallest unit that
            can be said to be alive.
            • An organism may consist of one single cell (unicellular) or many
            different numbers and types of cells (multicellular).
            • Within cells, special structures are responsible for particular functions,
            and the cell membrane forms the boundary that controls what enters
            and leaves the cell. 
            • In multicellular organisms, the body is a system of multiple interacting
            subsystems. These subsystems are groups of cells that work together
            to form tissues and organs that are specialized for particular body
            functions.
            • Each sense receptor responds to different inputs (electromagnetic,
            mechanical, chemical), transmitting them as signals that travel along
            nerve cells to the brain. The signals are then processed in the brain,
            resulting in immediate behaviors or memories.   
        ]
    },
    Earth’s Place in the Universe (ESS1): {
        Core Ideas: [
            • The geologic time scale interpreted from rock strata provides a way
            to organize Earth’s history.
            • Major historical events include the formation of mountain chains and
            ocean basins, the adaptation and extinction of particular living
            organisms, volcanic eruptions, periods of massive glaciation, and
            development of watersheds and rivers through glaciation and water
            erosion.
            • Analyses of rock strata and the fossil record provide only relative
            dates, not an absolute scale.
        ]
    },
    Earth’s Systems (ESS2): {
        Core Ideas: [
            - All Earth processes are the result of energy flowing and matter
            cycling within and among the planet’s systems. This energy is derived
            from the sun and Earth’s hot interior. The energy that flows and
            matter that cycles produces chemical and physical changes in Earth’s
            materials.
            • The planet’s systems interact over scales that
            range from microscopic to global in size; these
            interactions have shaped Earth’s history and will
            determine its future.
            • Water’s movements, both on the land and
            underground, cause weathering and erosion,
            which change the land’s surface features and
            create underground formations
            • Tectonic processes continually generate new ocean sea floor at
            ridges and destroy old sea floor at trenches.
            • Maps of ancient land and water patterns, based on investigations of
            rocks and fossils, make clear how Earth’s plates have moved great
            distances, collided, and spread apart. 
            • Water continually cycles among land, ocean, and atmosphere via
            transpiration, evaporation, condensation, and crystallization, and
            precipitation, as well as downhill flows on land.
            • Global movements of water and its changes in form are propelled by
            sunlight and gravity. 
            • Weather and climate are influenced by interactions involving sunlight,
            the ocean, the atmosphere, ice, landforms, and living things.
            • These interactions vary with latitude, altitude, and local and regional
            geography, all of which can affect oceanic and atmospheric flow
            patterns.
            • Because these patterns are so complex, weather can be predicted
            only probabilistically
            • Variations in density due to variations in temperature and salinity
            drive a global pattern on interconnected ocean currents.
            • Weather and climate are influenced by interactions involving sunlight,
            the ocean, the atmosphere, ice, landforms, and living things.
            • These interactions vary with latitude, altitude, and local and regional
            geography, all of which can affect oceanic and atmospheric flow
            patterns.
            • The ocean exerts a major influence on weather and climate by
            absorbing energy from the sun, and globally redistributing it through
            ocean currents.
        ]
    },
    Earth and Human Activity (ESS3): {
        Core Ideas: [• Mapping the history of natural hazards in a region, combined with an
understanding of related geologic forces, can help forecast the
locations and likelihoods of future events. ]
    },

]