The Phantom Tollbooth: {
    Chapter 1: [
        Milo is a boy who does not know what to do with himself. He is bored senseless by practically everything
         in his life and is constantly trying to find something exciting or interesting. Milo especially dislikes 
         his schoolwork because he cannot understand the use behind learning geography or math and thinks that 
         learning is "the greatest waste of time of all."
        One day, Milo goes into his bedroom to find a strange package waiting for him. The box is not quite square but not
        quite round and is addressed to "MILO, WHO HAS PLENTY OF TIME." There is no return address on the package, and Milo
        has no idea who might have sent it to him—it is not his birthday or Christmas. Deciding that there is no way he
        can return the box, he opens it. Inside he finds an unassembled turnpike tollbooth, a map, a book of traffic rules,
            and an instruction manual. He puts the tollbooth together and gets into a small electric car, one of the many toys 
            he is usually too bored to play with. As he approaches the tollbooth he is told to have his destination in mind, so
            he randomly picks the city of Dictionopolis from the map and passes through the turnstile.
    ],
    Chapter 2: [
        Once through the tollbooth, Milo finds himself speeding along a country highway. He is shocked to discover that the tollbooth was no toy at all. Since it is a beautiful day on the road, he continues on his trip. Before long, he arrives at Expectations where an excitable little man rushes up to his car. The Whether Man, has a habit of saying everything three times. In response to Milo's questions about how to reach Dictionopolis, the Whether Man talks nonstop about navigation and the weather.
Milo presses on, leaving Expectations. The road gets increasingly curvy and repetitive. Bored by the seemingly endless circles, Milo's mind begins to wander and he becomes very drowsy. The car also seems to tire and grinds to a halt. As he sits, almost asleep, a distant voice informs Milo that he is in the Doldrums.
After looking around, Milo realizes there is a tiny man sitting on his shoulder who changes color to match it. He then notices a number of little people around him hiding like chameleons. They introduce themselves as the Lethargians and describe their idle lives in the Doldrums, explaining that thinking and laughing are both outlawed.
Suddenly a large dog with a clock for a body comes running up, frightening the Lethargians away. The watchdog whose job it is to make sure nobody wastes time, suspiciously asks Milo what he is doing in the Doldrums. When Milo replies that he is "just killing time," the watchdog becomes furious and tells Milo that the only thing worse than wasting time is killing it. He tells Milo that if he wants to leave the Doldrums he only needs to do the opposite of what got him there. Since Milo drifted into the Doldrums by not thinking, he concentrates on thinking and his car begins moving. Soon he is back on his way to Dictionopolis with the watchdog.
    ],
    Analysis 1 and 2: [
        Analysis
In Chapters 1 and 2, Juster sets out the major theme of the book in two forms, one general and the other more specific. Milo's character represents all bored children; note that Juster gives us no specifics about Milo's classes, friends, or parents. Milo is generic, and thus can be seen as representing a whole category of character, or an archetype. In this case, the traits Milo symbolizes are boredom and laziness.
Juster sets up the premise so that there is a drastic contrast to Milo's moping around the house-something has to happen to shake up Milo's world. That something is the anonymous package. The gift-giver does not have a name, which makes him or her as nonspecific as Milo. Here Juster sets out the theme of the book on the first, broader level: The Phantom Tollbooth is largely about discovering and appreciating what is interesting in everyday life. Milo finds something—in the most common place, his bedroom&mdashthat at first seems nondescript but then, once opened, reveals a gateway to a magical land.
    It is also important to notice that Milo's feelings of boredom disappear as soon as he leaves his old world behind. Instead of being frightened by the sudden transportation from his bedroom to a country highway in an unknown land, Milo is so busy noticing what a beautiful day it is that he forgets to be scared. His brief stop in Expectations highlights the excitement he feels and Milo becomes eager to see more. To linger in Expectations, Milo realizes, is pointless since all one can do is wonder (asking "whether" questions) about where he can go next and what he can do.
When the distance between Expectations, where he comes up with ideas about the land he is about to tour, and the city of Dictionopolis proves to be very long and winding, Milo loses interest and begins to daydream. Here we see Juster's more specific theme: Milo allows his mind to wander, and so he physically wanders into the Doldrums, the land of ultimate boredom and laziness. The physical and the mental become one. Not only do Milo's physical surroundings jump-start his mental process, but here his mental processes change his physical surroundings. Juster suggests that a person can affect one with the other, exciting a boring place by thinking exciting thoughts or getting excited by finding an exciting place. The introduction of the watchdog—who eventually becomes Milo's closest friend in the Lands Beyond—and his suggestion that Milo can escape the Doldrums simply by putting his mind to work, underscores Juster's larger theme of finding interesting things everywhere, including seemingly boring places. All Milo has to do is use his imagination to get him back on track and speeding towards a more exciting and interesting place.
    ],
    Chapter 3: [
        As the two travelers make their way toward Dictionopolis, the watchdog apologizes for his gruff behavior and explains that people expect watchdogs to be ferocious. He introduces himself as Tock and launches into a speech about the value of time and the importance of the watchdog's role in preserving it as he and Milo approach the gates of Dictionopolis.
Once inside, Milo and Tock discover that it is market day in the city, and the square is filled with merchants selling all sorts of words and letters. They meet the five royal advisors, who have the curious habit of repeating each other in synonyms and randomly defining some of the words each other use. The advisors explain the function of the word market in a dizzyingly complicated fashion, leaving poor Milo as lost as when he first entered the city. "I never knew words could be so confusing," he tells Tock. "Only when you use a lot to say a little," the watchdog replies.
    ],
    Chpater 4: [
        Milo and Tock explore the word market, looking over shelves full of everyday words and fancy-sounding words (which are so expensive Milo cannot afford even one) and jars filled only with letters. Milo samples an A and finds that it tastes "sweet and delicious—just the way you'd expect an A to taste."
As Milo and the shopkeeper talk about the construction of words, the buzzing of a giant bee surprises them. The Spelling Bee tells them not to be alarmed and then spells the word "alarmed" for them. The insect claims that he can spell almost any word and proves it by taking challenges. When Milo expresses his amazement at this skill, another insect, this one looking more like a beetle, trots over and pronounces it "BALDERDASH!"
Dodging swings of the grumpy beetle's cane, the Spelling Bee introduces him as the Humbug, "a very dislikeable fellow." The two giant insects begin an argument and things go from bad to worse when the Spelling Bee knocks the Humbug's hat off his head and the Humbug begins swinging wildly with his cane, knocking one stall into another and causing the whole marketplace to collapse like dominoes.
    ], Chapter 5: [
When the dust from the Humbug's disastrous clumsiness settles, the merchants begin hollering in mixed-up nonsense because all of their words have become jumbled. Eventually, they right the stalls and sweep up the spilled words, finishing up just as Officer Shrift arrives on the scene. Milo is surprised by how short the policeman is, noticing that he is twice as wide as he is tall.
Officer Shrift begins his investigation by declaring everyone present to be guilty and then begins asking very confusing questions that seem to have nothing to do with the collapse of the marketplace. Officer Shrift finds Milo guilty of various ridiculous crimes and, pronounces a sentence of six million years in prison then escorts Milo and Tock to a dank and musty dungeon. He warns them about "the witch" in the prison then shuts the three into a cell.
    Inside Milo meets the "Which," Faintly Macabre. She explains that she is King Azaz's great aunt and was once in charge of choosing which words would be used for which occasions. As time went on, she noticed how frightfully wasteful people were with their words, often using too many for the simplest statements. So she began to give people fewer and fewer words to use, eventually becoming so miserly that nobody could speak or write at all. King Azaz became infuriated and locked the Which in the prison.
Faintly Macabre tells Milo that only the return of Rhyme and Reason will free her. When Milo seems confused, she settles down to tell him the story of Rhyme and Reason.
    ],
    Chapter 3-5 Analysis: [
        In this section, Juster begins to orient us in the Lands Beyond and sets up some plot motifs and themes that will frequently reappear throughout the book. Dictionopolis gives the reader the first taste of the "civilized" parts of the Land Beyond; later, Milo travels to lands outside of the city that are quite wild. In Dictionopolis, as in the rest of the Lands Beyond, Milo finds that what he usually cannot touch or taste (like words or reasons) are physical objects. He slowly begins to understand this idea after his interlude with the gatekeeper and wanderings in the word market. This plot motif, in which Milo discovers some unusual aspect of the Lands Beyond and figures it out with the help of the people he meets along the way, is a common occurrence in The Phantom Tollbooth .

This motif relates to the theme of education, a major part of Juster's book. As he wanders the word market, Milo becomes increasingly aware of how many words there are and how few he knows. He is also very impressed by the Spelling Bee, who is able to spell practically every word there is. Milo's lack of education in this subject eventually gets him into quite a bit of trouble when Officer Shrift begins asking him questions that he cannot understand. Once in prison, Milo realizes how valuable an education in reading and writing can be and vows to learn more about words.

Another important theme that first appears in this section is one that will soon become the focal point of Milo's travels: Rhyme and Reason. One aspect of the Lands Beyond is that there is an element of nonsense to it. The Whether Man, in Chapter 1, acts very strangely, running around babbling and never answering any questions. Similarly, Officer Shrift conducts his investigation and trial of Milo and Tock in a ridiculous fashion and sentences them to an unbelievable six million years in prison. Faintly Macabre, the Which, also tells a story in which she behaved unreasonably, becoming a miser with words.

All of this foolish behavior, especially the Which's, can be linked to the disappearance of Rhyme and Reason from the land. Juster frequently returns to this theme as Milo encounters a number of nonsensical characters throughout the book. The author's message is that of simple common sense: each of these characters has lost his or her understanding of the obviously right thing to do.

It is also significant that Milo begins his friendship with Tock, the watchdog, in this chapter, as it represents an important turning point for Milo. Though Milo certainly has a lot to learn, his biggest problem was his boredom and laziness. Tock saved him from that in the Doldrums by getting him to use his imagination, and the fact that he continues to accompany Milo suggests that Milo has conquered this problem altogether. In the rest of the book, Milo will deal with a number of his shortcomings, but never again will he appear to be the dull little boy he was in Chapter 1. His immediate friendship with Tock suggests that he has the watchdog to thank for it.
    ],
    Chapter 6: [
        Faintly Macabre begins the story of Rhyme and Reason by describing the horrible place the Lands Beyond were when they were first created. One day, a young prince from across the sea appeared and established a city that would become the Kingdom of Wisdom. Eventually he had two sons who went out in the wilderness to start their own cities, one founding Dictionopolis and the other establishing Digitopolis.

The king also found a basket with twin baby girls in his gardens one day. The king was delighted with the girls, whom he named Rhyme and Reason, and he raised them as his own children. When the king died, he left instructions that the Kingdom of Wisdom was to be divided equally between his two sons, who would also have the responsibility of caring for Rhyme and Reason.
Over the years, Azaz and the Mathemagician came to rely upon the princesses' wise judgment as the brothers grew more and more competitive and distrustful. Things reached a boiling point when they began arguing about whether numbers or letters were more important. The two rulers brought their quarrel to the princesses who, after careful consideration, declared that numbers and words were equally important.
    At last, Azaz and the Mathemagician were able to agree upon something: they were infuriated by princesses' answer. In an act of rage, they banished Rhyme and Reason from the Kingdom and imprisoned them in the Castle in the Air. When the story is done, the Which explains that Officer Shrift "loves putting people in prison, but does not care about keeping them there" and shows Milo and Tock the way out. On the outside, the king's five advisors find them and immediately lead them off to the Royal Banquet.
    ],
    Chapter 7:[
        Inside the banquet hall, Milo and Tock find a sizeable party waiting for them. The Humbug explains that they have been waiting for the guests of honor to select the meal. Milo proposes that they have a "light meal," and immediately a set of waiters hurries into the room carrying serving platters. When they remove the lids, rays of light shoot all over the banquet hall. The Humbug suggests that Milo select a dish that the guests might find "a little more filling." Milo, who has not picked up on the menu game yet, orders a square meal, prompting the waiters to bring plates filled with a variety of squares. For dessert, the waiters bring out platters of half-baked ideas, which the Humbug explains are very sweet but can cause indigestion. Milo munches on his "THE EARTH IS FLAT" while the king devours "NIGHT AIR IS BAD AIR."
    ],
    Chapter 8: [
        As soon as King Azaz's nonsensical Royal Banquet is over, the guests rush from the hall, leaving only Azaz, Milo, Tock and the Humbug, who explains that they have all gone to dinner. The king declares that he will command that his guests eat their dinners before the banquet. That would be just as bad, Milo argues.
Milo gently suggests that the return of Rhyme and Reason might help sort things out. The king agrees but thinks that it is impossible, since someone would have to go all the way to Digitopolis to convince the Mathemagician then get past the wicked demons in the Mountains of Ignorance and scale the two thousand step staircase up to the Castle in the Air.
The king charges Milo with this seemingly impossible mission, ominously telling him that there is "one more serious problem" with the quest that Milo will only learn once it is over. Azaz hands the young boy a small box that contains all the words he knows and tells him that he may find it handy on his journey. Recognizing that Milo will need a guide, the king orders the Humbug to go along on as well. The Humbug, who has been trying with all his might to agree with everybody all at once, suddenly finds himself in a very disagreeable position but is calmed by the king's flattery. As a crowd gathers to cheer them on their way, Milo and his two companions embark on their great adventure.
    ],
    Chapter 6-8 Analysis: [
        In this section, Juster fully develops the Rhyme and Reason theme. The story of the rise of the Kingdom of Wisdom and the division between Azaz and the Mathemagician not only explains the literal disappearance of the princesses but also relates to the secondary theme of education. Rhyme and Reason are a part of neither the world of words or numbers. Instead they are common sense—something that is essential to wisdom but is not taught in schools. While Azaz and the Mathemagician had nothing to do with discovering or raising Rhyme and Reason, they do have the power to repress them. Their argument about numbers and letters (Juster may be referring here to the common disagreements among scholars and students) is pure nonsense, a fact that only the princesses, in their wisdom, can see.
Thanks to Faintly Macabre's story, Milo also understands the need for Rhyme and Reason, and, as a result, Azaz realizes that Milo is the perfect person to help secure their return. Since Milo conquered his boredom and laziness in the first section of the book, it seems his next quest will be to discover true wisdom, which is symbolized by the two princesses. His trip to Digitopolis and trek through the Mountains of Ignorance represent not only a physical journey but an educational one as well. In order to find wisdom, Juster seems to be suggesting that Milo will need to learn some lessons in the world of the Lands Beyond.
It is also important to notice the two companions who are assigned to help Milo. Tock and the Humbug are, in many ways, opposites. Tock is dutiful and selfless; his only concern is making sure that people use their time wisely, particularly Milo. The Humbug, on the other hand, cares mostly about himself. He constantly wastes time by blathering on about himself or trying to suck up to important people like King Azaz. These efforts at flattery are not only pointless but also counterproductive for the Humbug. His brown-nosing is directly responsible for his unwanted appointment as Milo's guide. If the Humbug had simply kept his big mouth shut, he would not have ended up escorting Milo on what he considers to be a fool's errand.
In this section, Juster also forwards a number of recurring motifs. As we have already seen, the Lands Beyond are filled with nonsensical people and deeds. Juster continues this motif in the Royal Banquet scene, adding to it a the new motif of punning. A pun is a play on words, a way of using the double-meanings of words to make jokes. Milo's disastrous efforts at ordering a meal demonstrate this motif: first he orders a "light" meal, by which he means small and healthy. The waiters, however, take the term "light" to refer to the beams that come from the sun or light bulbs. The same happens when Milo orders a "square" meal and discovers, after making his speech, that he must "eat his words." By playing upon the different meanings of these words and phrases, Juster creates a series of amusing puns.
    ],
    Chapter 9: [
        Motoring along in the electric car, Milo, Tock and the Humbug take in the scenery and stop to enjoy a panoramic view. When Milo comments that the view is beautiful, a strange voice counters that "[i]t's all in the way you look at things." Milo whirls around and sees a boy about his age floating several feet above the ground. "For instance," the floating boy continues, "If you happened to like deserts, you might not think this was beautiful at all."
Milo asks the boy how the boy is able to float in the air at the same time as the boy was about to ask Milo how Milo is able to touch the ground with his feet. In his family, the boy explains, everyone is born with their heads at the height they will be once they grow up; instead of growing steadily toward the sky, their legs grown down toward the ground. Milo explains that, where he comes from, the opposite is true.
    The boy introduces himself as Alec Bings and claims that he has the power to see through things. In fact, the only thing he cannot see, Alec explains, "is whatever happens to be right in front of [his] nose." ilo is dazzled by this and wants to be able to see things as well. Alec tells him to simply start thinking like an adult and once Milo does, sure enough he begins to rise off the ground. Then he suddenly drops back to the earth and declares that he'd prefer to keep seeing things as a child since it is "not so far to fall."
    ],
    Chpater 10: [
        Alec, Milo, Tock, and the Humbug continue their walk in the forest, coming upon a large clearing in which lies a magnificent metropolis. The city, Alec says, is called Illusions and is really just a mirage. Its twin city, Reality, turns out to be all around the travelers. Alec explains that Reality was once as beautiful as Illusions, but people in Reality decided that things would be much more efficient if they went everywhere as fast as possible and didn't bother to stop and appreciate things along the way. As a result, the city withered away.

Alec next leads the group to an enormous open-air orchestra concert of over a thousand musicians, all conducted by Chroma the Great. Chroma waves his arms, and the musicians seem to be playing their instruments, although Milo doesn't hear anything. Alec explains that this orchestra is responsible for providing all the colors in the world. Milo meets Chroma, who talks about what a dull place the world would be without colors before Chroma hurries off to bed. Before he goes, Chroma asks Milo to keep an eye on the orchestra overnight and to wake him at 5:23 a.m. for the sunrise.
    ],
    Chapter 11: [
        Milo wakes up at 5:22 a.m. and decides that he should let Chroma sleep in and simply conduct the orchestra himself. The colors at first begin normally but Milo quickly loses control, causing all the colors to become wild and mismatched. Finally, after the sun has risen and set a full seven times, he gives up and drops his arms. It is 5:27 a.m., and it looks like night again. Chroma comes running up completely unaware that seven days have passed.
        Alec escorts Milo, Tock, and the Humbug to the end of the Forest of Sight, where he bids them farewell and gives Milo a telescope as a gift so that he can "see things as they really are."
The three travelers pile back into the electric car and soon drive up to a carnival-style wagon bearing the sign "KAKOFONOUS A. DISCHORD, DOCTOR OF DISSONANCE." Within they find Dischord himself, a man with ears that are bigger than his head. As a purveyor of noise pills, racket lotion, clamor salve and hubbub tonic, Dischord mixes up a foul sounding substance that Milo and his companions refuse. Rather than waste it, the doctor summons Dynne, his terrible smoke-monster sidekick who gulps down the concoction. Dischord and Dynne talk for a bit about how wonderful noises are and how important they are to life before heading out to make their rounds. They bid Milo to be careful in the Valley of Sound.
    ],
    Chapter 9, 10, 11 Analysis: [
        In this section, Juster forwards the theme of education as Milo learns his next set of lessons in the Lands Beyond. His teachers include Alec Bings, Chroma the Great, and even the wretched Dr. Dischord. From Alec Bings, Milo learns a great deal about perspective. Alec Bings has the unfortunate fate to have to look at things from the same perspective for his entire life. Rather than seeing things differently as he ages, like most people do, Alec will always have the same grown-up outlook. This relates to the motif of nonsense as Alec's unusual situation results in his ability to see everything but that which is right before his eyes. This seems contrary to common sense and creates quite a few problems for the floating boy as the smashes into trees and bushes whenever he tries to run through the forest. It is important to notice that despite the fact that he has only a single, ridiculous perspective, Alec Bings is aware of the multitude of perspectives that different people have. In fact, Milo first meets him because Alec comments that not everyone would think a forest vista is beautiful.
Milo's lesson on perspective continues in the twin cities of Reality and Illusions. Since the residents of Reality have decided to block out their perceptions by turning their heads down and hurrying from place to place, their city has become literally invisible. The city of Illusions is even worse; it does not even exist as anything but a mirage. Here Juster seems to be referring to the tendency of people to rush past the important things in everyday life. Remember that before coming to the Lands Beyond, one of Milo's biggest problems was his inability to appreciate the things around him. In the twin cities, we see what might have happened to poor Milo if he had not corrected his problem: the things around him would have become uninteresting, just as they did in the city of Reality.
Juster also presents the lesson of perspective through the characters Dischord and Dynne. This unlikable pair seems to think that noises are much more enjoyable to hear than beautiful sounds. Dischord seems to think that Milo's ability to appreciate sounds such as music is a "disease" that needs to be cured, much as we might think the same of Dischord. Here Milo is reminded of the well-known idiom that "one man's music is another man's noise" as he and Dischord differ over which sounds they prefer.
Milo learns another lesson in the Forest of Sight, this one from Chroma the Great—or rather Chroma's absence. Without the maestro of color around to set things in their proper order, Milo witnesses what sort of chaos would exist. Juster seems to be further the education theme here by illustrating how important Chroma's knowledge and experience are. Milo thinks that conducting the color orchestra will be easy because, to his untrained eye, it looks that way. When he takes to the podium, he learns just how difficult conducting really is and how unqualified he is to do it. Juster seems to be telling us that in order to color the world properly, one needs the education and experience of Chroma the Great.
    ],
    Chapter 12: [
        Upon entering the Valley of Sound, Milo can immediately tell why Dischord and Dynne seemed to be so afraid of it: there is no sound whatsoever. As Tock frets over his lack of ticking, a crowd of people bearing protest signs about the silence comes down the road. One of them produces a blackboard and writes out the story of the Valley's loss. He explains that the Soundkeeper, once the benevolent ruler of the Valley, became upset with the lack of appreciation for beautiful sounds and the rise of Dr. Dischord's noises, and she, consequently, locked away all the sounds in her fortress. The blackboard man asks Milo to help by visiting the Soundkeeper and stealing a sound that they can use to destroy the fortress. Milo agrees and, with Tock and the Humbug sets out for the fortress.
        The Soundkeeper turns out to be a perfectly pleasant woman who invites the travelers inside where they find sounds still exist. She tours them through the vault where she keeps every sound that was every made, showing as an example the "exact tune that George Washington whistled when he crossed the Delaware on that icy night in 1777." The Soundkeeper demonstrates how she catalogues sound by having Milo speak then walking him over to a filing cabinet where, sure enough, his "hello" is neatly stored.
Next on the tour is the laboratory where sounds are invented—and also become visible. Milo claps his hands and sheets of paper begin shooting out. He tries to reason with the Soundkeeper about the silence in the valley, but she will not hear of it. At one point Milo tries to retort with "But!" and catches himself short, feeling the word form on his tongue and stay there. He quickly, and silently, makes for the door, smuggling his sound out with him.
    ],  
    Chapter 13: [
        Milo hurries back to the angry mob where he is directed to deposit his stolen sound into a large cannon. When fired, the sound shatters the walls of the fortress and all the sounds in the vault come crashing out. After a few moments of noisy confusion, the dust settles, and Milo sees the Soundkeeper sitting on a pile of rubble. He goes over to apologize for helping destroy her fortress, and the Soundkeeper is very understanding. She recognizes that it was her own fault for taking away all the sounds and realizes that silence is not the solution. "The problem," she says, "is to use each sound at the proper time."
Dynne comes running up with an enormous sack full of sounds that are not noisy enough for his tastes. It turns out that he has gathered up nearly all the sounds of the vault, which the Soundkeeper happily accepts. As Dynne hurries away, the Soundkeeper remarks that the unpleasant sounds he likes have value because they help us appreciate the pleasant ones more. If only Rhyme and Reason would return, she says, they might be able to bridge that gap. She gives Milo a package of sounds to remember her by and bids him good luck with his quest.
Milo, Tock, and the Humbug pile back in the car and soon find themselves driving along the Sea of Knowledge. When each of the three makes an unfounded assumption about the ease of their quest, they leap out of the car and find themselves standing on the island of Conclusions. Unfortunately, they discover that it's much easier to jump to conclusions than to jump away; they have to swim back to shore. On the other side of the shore, Milo and Tock are soaked through with the waters of Knowledge while the Humbug, who thinks he already knows everything, is bone dry. Milo comments that he has learned a lesson about jumping to conclusions, and the three travelers are soon on their way again.
    ], 
    Chapter 14: [
        Shortly after their detour to Conclusions, Milo, Tock, and the Humbug come upon a fork in the road where the meet the Dodecahedron, a man with twelve faces, each of which displays a different emotion. When Milo introduces himself, the Dodecahedron wonders if everyone with one face is called "a Milo" and explains that in Digitopolis everything is named for what it is. He finds Milo's system of naming very difficult and wonders how anything get done if the numbers all had their own names, and one had to do the sum of "Robert plus John."
Milo asks which fork he should take to get to Digitopolis, and the Dodecahedron responds with a series of increasingly ridiculous story problems. When Milo points out how silly they are, the Dodecahedron remarks, "as long as the answer is right, who cares if the question is wrong? Then he explains that none of the three roads is right and points out that it was foolish of Milo to assume that just because there were three choices one of them was right. The Dodecahedron offers to personally escort the travelers to Digitopolis and hops in the car with them.
    On the outskirts of the city, they stop to see the numbers mine where digits are chiseled out of the stone much like precious gems. Inside they meet the Mathemagician, an impressive man who carries a giant pencil that he uses as a wand. The Mathemagician explains the functions of the mine to the companions and then invites them to lunch.
    ]
}