4th Grade CA Common Core Standards ELA: [
Fourth Grade Common Core Standards: Reading
Standards for Literature (RL)
Fourth Grade Common Core Standards: Reading
Informational Text (RI)
KEY IDEAS AND DETAILS
RL.4.1 Refer to details and examples in a text when explaining
what the text says explicitly and when drawing inferences
from the text.
RI.4.1 Refer to details and examples in a text when explaining what
the text says explicitly and when drawing inferences from the
text.
RL.4.2 Determine a theme of a story, drama, or poem from details
in the text; summarize the text.
RI.4.2 Determine the main idea of a text and explain how it is
supported by key details; summarize the text.
RL.4.3 Describe in depth a character, setting, or event in a story
or drama, drawing on specific details in the text (e.g., a
character’s thoughts, words, or actions).
RI.4.3 Explain events, procedures, ideas, or concepts in a historical,
scientific, or technical text, including what happened and why,
based on specific information in the text.
CRAFT AND STRUCTURE
RL.4.4 Determine the meaning of words and phrases as they are
used in a text, including those that allude to significant
characters found in mythology (e.g., Herculean). (See grade
4 Language standards 4-6 on page 28 for additional
expectations.) CA
RI.4.4 Determine the meaning of general academic and domainspecific words or phrases in a text relevant to a grade 4 topic or
subject area. (See grade 4 Language standards 4-6 on page
28 for additional expectations.) CA
RL.4.5 Explain major differences between poems, drama, and
prose, and refer to the structural elements of poems (e.g.,
verse, rhythm, meter) and drama (e.g., casts of characters,
settings, descriptions, dialogue, stage directions) when
writing or speaking about a text.
RI4.5 Describe the overall structure (e.g., chronology, comparison,
cause/effect, problem/solution) of events, ideas, concepts, or
information in a text or part of a text
RL.4.6 Compare and contrast the point of view from which
different stories are narrated, including the difference
between first- and third-person narrations.
RI.4.6 Compare and contrast a firsthand and secondhand account of
the same event or topic; describe the differences in focus and
the information provided.
INTEGRATION OF KNOWLEDGE AND IDEAS
RL.4.7 Make connections between the text of a story or drama
and a visual or oral presentation of the text, identifying
where each version reflects specific descriptions and
directions in the text.
RI.4.7 Interpret information presented visually, orally, or
quantitatively (e.g., in charts, graphs, diagrams, time lines,
animations, or interactive elements on Web pages) and explain
how the information contributes to an understanding of the
text in which it appears.
RL.4.8 (Not applicable to literature) RI.4.8 Explain how an author uses reasons and evidence to support
particular points in a text.
RL.4.9 Compare and contrast the treatment of similar themes
and topics (e.g., opposition of good and evil) and patterns
of events (e.g., the quest) in stories, myths, and traditional
literature from different cultures.
RI.4.9 Integrate information from two texts on the same topic in
order to write or speak about the subject knowledgeably.
RANGE AND LEVEL OF TEXT COMPLEXITY
RL.4.10 By the end of the year, read and comprehend literature,
including stories, dramas, and poetry, in the grades 4–5
text complexity band proficiently, with scaffolding as
needed at the high end of the range.
RI.4.40 By the end of year, read and comprehend informational texts,
including history/social studies, science, and technical texts,
in the grades 4–5 text complexity band proficiently, with
scaffolding as needed at the high end of the range.
Reading Foundational Skills (RF)
PRINT CONCEPTS
RF.4.1 n/a
PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS
RF.4.2 n/a
PHONICS AND WORD RECOGNITION
RF.4.3 Know and apply grade-level phonics and word analysis skills in decoding words.
a. Use combined knowledge of all letter sound correspondences, syllabication patterns, and morphology (e.g., roots and affixes) to
read accurately unfamiliar multisyllabic words in context and out of context.
FLUENCY
RF.4.4 Read with sufficient accuracy and fluency to support comprehension.
a. Read on-level text with purpose and understanding.
b. Read on-level prose and poetry orally with accuracy, appropriate rate, and expression on successive readings.
c. Use context to confirm or self-correct word recognition and understanding, rereading as necessary.
© SAN DIEGO COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION (2012) COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS SERIES
Writing (W)
TEXT TYPES AND PURPOSES
W.4.1 Write opinion pieces on topics or texts, supporting a point of view with reasons and information.
a. Introduce a topic or text clearly, state an opinion, and create an organizational structure in which related ideas are grouped to
support the writer’s purpose.
b. Provide reasons that are supported by facts and details.
c. Link opinion and reasons using words and phrases (e.g., for instance, in order to, in addition).
d. Provide a concluding statement or section related to the opinion presented.
W.4.2 Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas and information clearly.
a. Introduce a topic clearly and group related information in paragraphs and sections; include formatting (e.g., headings),
illustrations, and multimedia when useful to aiding comprehension.
b. Develop the topic with facts, definitions, concrete details, quotations, or other information and examples related to the topic.
c. Link ideas within categories of information using words and phrases (e.g., another, for example, also, because).
d. Use precise language and domain-specific vocabulary to inform about or explain the topic.
e. Provide a concluding statement or section related to the information or explanation presented.
W.4.3 Write narratives to develop real or imagined experiences or events using effective technique, descriptive details, and clear event
sequences.
a. Orient the reader by establishing a situation and introducing a narrator and/or characters; organize an event sequence that
unfolds naturally.
b. Use dialogue and description to develop experiences and events or show the responses of characters to situations.
c. Use a variety of transitional words and phrases to manage the sequence of events.
d. Use concrete words and phrases and sensory details to convey experiences and events precisely.
e. Provide a conclusion that follows from the narrated experiences or events.
PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF WRITING
W.4.4 Produce clear and coherent writing (including multiple-paragraph texts) in which the development and organization are
appropriate to task, purpose, and audience. (Grade-specific expectations for writing types are defined in standards 1–3 above.) CA
W.4.5 With guidance and support from peers and adults, develop and strengthen writing as needed by planning, revising, and editing.
(Editing for conventions should demonstrate command of Language standards 1–3 up to and including grade 4.)
W.4.6 With some guidance and support from adults, use technology, including the Internet, to produce and publish writing as well as to
interact and collaborate with others; demonstrate sufficient command of keyboarding skills to type a minimum of one page in a
single sitting.
RESEARCH TO BUILD AND PRESENT KNOWLEDGE
W.4.7 Conduct short research projects that build knowledge through investigation of different aspects of a topic.
W.4.8 Recall relevant information from experiences or gather relevant information from print and digital sources; take notes, paraphrase,
and categorize information, and provide a list of sources.
W.4.9 Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research.
a. Apply grade 4 Reading standards to literature (e.g., “Describe in depth a character, setting, or event in a story or drama, drawing on
specific details in the text [e.g., a character’s thoughts, words, or actions].”).
b. Apply grade 4 Reading standards to informational texts (e.g., “Explain how an author uses reasons and evidence to support
particular points in a text”).
RANGE OF WRITING
W.4.10 Write routinely over extended time frames (time for research, reflection, and revision) and shorter time frames (a single sitting or a
day or two) for a range of discipline-specific tasks, purposes, and audiences.
Bold, underlined text = California additions to the Common Core
Fourth Grade Common Core State Standards: California
© SAN DIEGO COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION (2012) COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS SERIES
Bold, underlined text = California additions to the Common Core
Fourth Grade Common Core State Standards: California
Speaking & Listening
COMPREHENSION & COLLABORATION
SL.4.1 Engage effectively in a range of collaborative discussions (one-on-one, in groups, and teacher led) with diverse partners on grade 4
topics and texts, building on others’ ideas and expressing their own clearly.
a. Come to discussions prepared, having read or studied required material; explicitly draw on that preparation and other
information known about the topic to explore ideas under discussion.
b. Follow agreed-upon rules for discussions and carry out assigned roles.
c. Pose and respond to specific questions to clarify or follow up on information, and make comments that contribute to the
discussion and link to the remarks of others.
d. Review the key ideas expressed and explain their own ideas and understanding in light of the discussion.
SL.4.2 Paraphrase portions of a text read aloud or information presented in diverse media and formats, including visually, quantitatively,
and orally.
SL.4.3 Identify the reasons and evidence a speaker or media source provides to support particular points
PRESENTATION OF KNOWLEDGE AND IDEAS
SL.4.4 Report on a topic or text, tell a story, or recount an experience in an organized manner, using appropriate facts and relevant,
descriptive details to support main ideas or themes; speak clearly at an understandable pace.
a. Plan and deliver a narrative presentation that: relates ideas, observations, or recollections; provides a clear context; and
includes clear insight into why the event or experience is memorable. CA
SL.4.5 Add audio recordings and visual displays to presentations when appropriate to enhance the development of main ideas or themes.
SL.4.6 Differentiate between contexts that call for formal English (e.g., presenting ideas) and situations where informal discourse is
appropriate (e.g., small-group discussion); use formal English when appropriate to task and situation. (See grade 4 Language
standards 1 and 3 for specific expectations.)
© SAN DIEGO COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION (2012) COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS SERIES
Language
CONVENTIONS OF STANDARD ENGLISH
L.4.1 Demonstrate command of the conventions of standard English grammar and usage when writing or speaking.
a. Write fluidly and legibly in cursive or joined italics.
b. Use interrogative, relative pronouns (who, whose, whom, which, that) and relative adverbs (where, when, why).
c. Form and use the progressive (e.g., I was walking; I am walking; I will be walking) verb tenses.
d. Use modal auxiliaries (e.g., can, may, must) to convey various conditions.
e. Order adjectives within sentences according to conventional patterns (e.g., a small red bag rather than a red small bag).
f. Form and use prepositional phrases.
g. Produce complete sentences, recognizing and correcting inappropriate fragments and run-ons.*
h. Correctly use frequently confused words (e.g., to, too, two; there, their).*
L4.2 Demonstrate command of the conventions of standard English capitalization, punctuation, and spelling when writing.
a. Use correct capitalization.
b. Use commas and quotation marks to mark direct speech and quotations from a text.
c. Use a comma before a coordinating conjunction in a compound sentence.
d. Spell grade-appropriate words correctly, consulting references as needed.
KNOWLEDGE OF LANGUAGE
L.4.3 Use knowledge of language and its conventions when writing, speaking, reading, or listening.
a. Choose words and phrases to convey ideas precisely.*
b. Choose punctuation for effect.*
c. Differentiate between contexts that call for formal English (e.g., presenting ideas) and situations where informal discourse is
appropriate (e.g., small-group discussion).
VOCABULARY ACQUISITION & USE
L.4.4 Determine or clarify the meaning of unknown and multiple-meaning words and phrases based on grade 4 reading and content,
choosing flexibly from a range of strategies.
a. Use context (e.g., definitions, examples, or restatements in text) as a clue to the meaning of a word or phrase.
b. Use common, grade-appropriate Greek and Latin affixes and roots as clues to the meaning of a word (e.g., telegraph, photograph,
autograph).
c. Consult reference materials (e.g., dictionaries, glossaries, thesauruses), both print and digital, to find the pronunciation and
determine or clarify the precise meaning of key words and phrases and to identify alternate word choices in all content areas.
L.4.5 Demonstrate understanding of figurative language, word relationships, and nuances in word meanings.
a. Explain the meaning of simple similes and metaphors (e.g., as pretty as a picture) in context.
b. Recognize and explain the meaning of common idioms, adages, and proverbs.
c. Demonstrate understanding of words by relating them to their opposites (antonyms) and to words with similar but not identical
meanings (synonyms).
L.4.6 Acquire and use accurately grade-appropriate general academic and domain-specific words and phrases, including those that signal
precise actions, emotions, or states of being (e.g., quizzed, whined, stammered) and that are basic to a particular topic (e.g., wildlife,
conservation, and endangered when discussing animal preservation).
]