3rd Grade NGSS Science Standards : [
    3-LS1 From Molecules to Organisms: Structures and Processes: [
        Develop models to describe that organisms have unique and diverse life cycles but all have in common birth, growth, reproduction, and death. [Clarification Statement: Changes organisms go through during their life form a pattern.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment of plant life cycles is limited to those of
flowering plants. Assessment does not include details of human reproduction.]
-LS1.B: Growth and Development of Organisms
- Reproduction is essential to the continued existence
of every kind of organism. Plants and animals have
unique and diverse life cycles. (3-LS1-1)
Crosscutting Concepts
Patterns
- Patterns of change can be used to make predictions. (3-LS1-1)
    ]
    3-LS2 Ecosystems: Interactions, Energy, and Dynamics: [
        LS2.D: Social Interactions and Group Behavior
- Being part of a group helps animals obtain food,
defend themselves, and cope with changes. Groups
may serve different functions and vary dramatically
in size. (Note: Moved from K–2.) (3-LS2-1)
Crosscutting Concepts
Cause and Effect
- Cause and effect relationships are routinely identified and used to explain change. (3-LS2-1)
    ]
    3-LS3 Heredity: Inheritance and Variation of Traits: [
        LS3.A: Inheritance of Traits
- Many characteristics of organisms are inherited from
their parents. (3-LS3-1)
- Other characteristics result from individuals’ interactions with the environment, which can range from
diet to learning. Many characteristics involve both
inheritance and environment. (3-LS3-2)
LS3.B: Variation of Traits
- Different organisms vary in how they look and function because they have different inherited information. (3-LS3-1)
- The environment also affects the traits that an
organism develops. (3-LS3-2)
Crosscutting Concepts
Patterns
- Similarities and differences in patterns can be used
to sort and classify natural phenomena. (3-LS3-1)
Cause and Effect
- Cause and effect relationships are routinely identified and used to explain change. (3-LS3-2)
    Analyze and interpret data to provide evidence that plants and animals have traits inherited from parents and that variation of these traits exists in a
group of similar organisms. [Clarification Statement: Patterns are the similarities and differences in traits shared between offspring and their parents, or
among siblings. Emphasis is on organisms other than humans.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include genetic mechanisms of inheritance
and prediction of traits. Assessment is limited to non-human examples.]
3-LS3-2. Use evidence to support the explanation that traits can be influenced by the environment. [Clarification Statement: Examples of the environment affecting
a trait could include normally tall plants grown with insufficient water are stunted; and a pet dog that is given too much food and little exercise may become
overweight.]
    ]
    3-LS4 Biological Evolution: Unity and Diversity: [
        Analyze and interpret data from fossils to provide evidence of the organisms and the environments in which they lived long ago. [Clarification Statement:
Examples of data could include type, size, and distributions of fossil organisms. Examples of fossils and environments could include marine fossils found on
dry land, tropical plant fossils found in Arctic areas, and fossils of extinct organisms.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment does not include identification of
specific fossils or present plants and animals. Assessment is limited to major fossil types and relative ages.]
3-LS4-2. Use evidence to construct an explanation for how the variations in characteristics among individuals of the same species may provide advantages in
surviving, finding mates, and reproducing. [Clarification Statement: Examples of cause and effect relationships could be plants that have larger thorns than
other plants may be less likely to be eaten by predators; and animals that have better camouflage coloration than other animals may be more likely to survive and therefore more likely to leave offspring.]
3-LS4-3. Construct an argument with evidence that in a particular habitat some organisms can survive well, some survive less well, and some cannot survive at
all. [Clarification Statement: Examples of evidence could include needs and characteristics of the organisms and habitats involved. The organisms and their
habitat make up a system in which the parts depend on each other.]
3-LS4-4. Make a claim about the merit of a solution to a problem caused when the environment changes and the types of plants and animals that live there may
change.* [Clarification Statement: Examples of environmental changes could include changes in land characteristics, water distribution, temperature, food,
and other organisms.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment is limited to a single environmental change. Assessment does not include the greenhouse effect
or climate change.]
LS2.C: Ecosystem Dynamics, Functioning, and
Resilience
- When the environment changes in ways that affect
a place’s physical characteristics, temperature, or
availability of resources, some organisms survive
and reproduce, others move to new locations, yet
others move into the transformed environment, and
some die. (secondary to 3-LS4-4)
LS4.A: Evidence of Common Ancestry and Diversity
- Some kinds of plants and animals that once lived
on Earth are no longer found anywhere. (Note:
Moved from K–2.) (3-LS4-1)
Crosscutting Concepts
Cause and Effect
- Cause and effect relationships are routinely identified and used to explain change. (3-LS4-2), (3-LS4-
3)
Scale, Proportion, and Quantity
- Observable phenomena exist from very short to very
long time periods. (3-LS4-1)
Systems and System Models
- A system can be described in terms of its components and their interactions. (3-LS4-4)
- Fossils provide evidence about the types of organisms that lived long ago and also about the nature
of their environments. (3-LS4-1)
LS4.B: Natural Selection
- Sometimes the differences in characteristics
between individuals of the same species provide
advantages in surviving, finding mates, and reproducing. (3-LS4-2)
LS4.C: Adaptation
- For any particular environment, some kinds of organisms survive well, some survive less well, and some
cannot survive at all. (3-LS4-3)
LS4.D: Biodiversity and Humans
- Populations live in a variety of habitats, and change
in those habitats affects the organisms living there.
(3-LS4-4)
Connections to Engineering, Technology, and
Applications of Science
Interdependence of Engineering, Technology and
Applications of Science on Society and the Natural
World
- Knowledge of relevant scientific concepts and
research findings is important in engineering. (3-
LS4-4)
Connections to Nature of Science
Scientific Knowledge Assumes an Order and
Consistency in Natural Systems
- Science assumes consistent patterns in natural
systems. (3-LS4-1)
    ]
    3-ESS2 Earth’s Systems: [
        . Represent data in tables and graphical displays to describe typical weather conditions expected during a particular season. [Clarification Statement:
Examples of data could include average temperature, precipitation, and wind direction.] [Assessment Boundary: Assessment of graphical displays is limited
to pictographs and bar graphs. Assessment does not include climate change.]
3-ESS2-2. Obtain and combine information to describe climates in different regions of the world.
    ESS2.D: Weather and Climate
- Scientists record patterns of the weather across
different times and areas so that they can make predictions about what kind of weather might happen
next. (3-ESS2-1)
- Climate describes a range of an area’s typical
weather conditions and the extent to which those
conditions vary over years. (3-ESS2-2)
Crosscutting Concepts
Patterns
- Patterns of change can be used to make predictions. (3-ESS2-1), (3-ESS2-2)
    ]
    3-ESS3 Earth and Human Activity: [
        ESS3.B: Natural Hazards
- A variety of natural hazards result from natural processes. Humans cannot eliminate natural hazards
but can take steps to reduce their impacts. (3-
ESS3-1) (Note: This Disciplinary Core Idea is also
addressed by 4-ESS3-2.)
Crosscutting Concepts
Cause and Effect
- Cause and effect relationships are routinely identified, tested, and used to explain change. (3-ESS3-
1)
Connections to Engineering, Technology, and
Applications of Science
Influence of Engineering, Technology, and Science on
Society and the Natural World
- Engineers improve existing technologies or develop
new ones to increase their benefits (e.g., better
artificial limbs), decrease known risks (e.g., seatbelts in cars), and meet societal demands (e.g., cell
phones). (3-ESS3-1)
Connections to Nature of Science
Science is a Human Endeavor
- Science affects everyday life. (3-ESS3-1)
    ]
    3-PS2 Motion and Stability: Forces and Interactions: [
        PS2.A: Forces and Motion
- Each force acts on one particular object and has
both strength and a direction. An object at rest typically has multiple forces acting on it, but they add
to give zero net force on the object. Forces that do
not sum to zero can cause changes in the object’s
speed or direction of motion. (Boundary: Qualitative
and conceptual, but not quantitative addition of
forces are used at this level.) (3-PS2-1)
Crosscutting Concepts
Patterns
- Patterns of change can be used to make predictions. (3-PS2-2)
Cause and Effect
- Cause and effect relationships are routinely identified. (3-PS2-1)
- Cause and effect relationships are routinely identified, tested, and used to explain change. (3-PS2-3)
 The patterns of an object’s motion in various situations can be observed and measured; when that
past motion exhibits a regular pattern, future motion
can be predicted from it. (Boundary: Technical
terms, such as magnitude, velocity, momentum,
and vector quantity, are not introduced at this level,
but the concept that some quantities need both
size and direction to be described is developed.)
(3-PS2-2)
PS2.B: Types of Interactions
- Objects in contact exert forces on each other. (3-
PS2-1)
- Electric, and magnetic forces between a pair of objects do not require that the objects be in contact.
The sizes of the forces in each situation depend
on the properties of the objects and their distances apart and, for forces between two magnets, on
their orientation relative to each other. (3-PS2-3),
(3-PS2-4)
Connections to Engineering, Technology, and
Applications of Science
Interdependence of Science, Engineering, and
Technology
- Scientific discoveries about the natural world can
often lead to new and improved technologies, which
are developed through the engineering design process. (3-PS2-4)
    ]
]